Network Science
Albert-László Barabási
Data Visualization by Mauro Martino
Data Analysis by Márton Pósfai


PDF Version: 
November 2012


CHAPTER 1
Introduction
From Saddam Hussein to network 
theory
Vulnerability due to interconnec­
tivity
Networks at the heart of complex 
systems
Two forces helped the emergence 
of network science
The characteristics of network
science
The impact of network science
Scientific impact
Summary
Bibliography
INTRODUCTION


SECTION 1
INTRODUCTION
This book aims to help teach network science to an inter­
disciplinary audience. Many of the choices I made in pre­
senting the material were guided by the desire to offer an 
enjoyable, yet systematic introduction to the field. I kept in 
mind that those entering the field are just as interested in 
learning about the genesis of the concepts network science 
introduced, as the tools they can use to study real networks 
and interpret the obtained results.
Several over-arching themes are present in this book, 
helping to offer an effective introduction:
(i) Given the empirical roots of network science, there is 
strong emphasis on empirical data. We have therefore 
assembled a set of ‘canonic’ databases, representing net­
works that are frequently analyzed in network science to 
test various network characteristics. Whenever possible, 
we use these datasets to illustrate the tools we introduce.
(ii) Given the potential diversity of the students interested 
in the field that may be familiar with one domain of inqui­
ry but not other, we devote special sections to each data­
set. The goal is to offer some degree of familiarity with the 
range of datasets explored in network science, and through 
this diversity to learn about the issues pertaining to data 
collection and curation.
This book is not a finished product but a work in progress. 
Hence we continue to update it, adding additional chap­
ters as they are finished.
There is a dedicated website to this project (Image 1.1), 
http://barabasilab.com/networksciencebook 
that contains not only the chapters, but also the slides I 
used in my classes to teach the material. Those who are in­
terested in teaching any part of the book are welcome to 
use these slides. The website also offers tools to provide 
feedback on the material, from comments to suggestions 
for improvement.
Image 1.1     http://barabasilab.com/networksciencebook 
2 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 2
FROM SADDAM HUSSEIN TO NETWORK THEORY
American forces encountered relatively little military re­
sistance as they took control of Iraq during the invasion 
that started in March 19, 2003. Yet, many of the regime’s 
high ranking officials, including Saddam Hussein, avoid­
ed capture.
Hussein was last spotted kissing a baby in Baghdad some 
time in April 2003, and then his trace went cold. To aid 
awareness of the officials they sought, the coalition forc­
es designed a deck of cards, each card engraved with the 
image of one of the 55 most wanted. It worked. By May 
1st 15 men on the cards were captured and by the end of 
the month another 12 were under custody. Yet, the ace of 
spades (Image 1.2a), i.e. Hussein himself, remained at 
large.
Intelligence officials hoped that some of the high ranking 
officials would surely know Hussein’s whereabouts. Yet, 
it was not to be. This became painfully obvious after the 
capture of Saddam’s trusted personal secretary and the ace 
of diamonds. Newspapers trumpeted his mid-June cap­
ture as the war’s biggest feat, as this could lead to Sadd­
am’s whereabouts. Yet, the dictator parted ways with his 
ally soon after the invasion, sending a clear signal to the 
investigators: relying on the traditional lines of power was 
of little help in trying to find him. Instead, they decided to 
turn to a tool that had little presence in military thinking 
before: network theory [1].
In 2003 network theory was an already burgeoning re­
search field, but the soldiers in the war zone had little ac­
cess to the exploding advances in this area. Instead, they 
arrived to it through a healthy dose of common sense and 
intuition. Col. James Hickey, in charge of a series of raids 
known as Operation Desert Scorpion, wanted to know the 
relationship between everyone killed or captured. The task 
fell to Lt. Col. Steve Russell, who was in direct charge of the 
raids, and Brian Reed, the operations officer under Hick­
ey, who was exposed to social networks during his studies 
at West Point. Reed started to systematically reconstruct 
the social network of Saddam’s inner circle. He did not rely 
on government documents and decrees, but rather gossip 
and family trees. As they meticulously pieced together an 
extensive diagram of who is related to whom in the Tikrit 
region, where Saddam was from, they started to use net­
work diagrams to guide the raids. In one of those raids they 
found over $8 million in US currency, about $1 million in 
Iraqi currency, jewelry worth over $2 million, rifles, and 
ammunition. Yet, the biggest prize was Saddam’s family 
photo album, providing the faces of those that the family 
Image 1.2a
The network 
of Saddam Hussein.
Ace of Spades. One of the 55 cards 
the US military has handed out to the 
coalition forces in Iraq, each listing a 
top official to be captured following 
the country’s 2003 invasion. The card 
shows the ace of spades, with the im­
age of Saddam Hussein, Iraq’s deposed 
president and dictator, the top prize of 
the hunt.
Image 1.2b
The network of Saddam Hussein.
The Social Network. A small region of the social network reconstructed by 
the US forces in the process of searching for Saddam Hussein. The map 
represents the relationship between individuals in Saddam’s inner circle.
FROM SADDAM HUSSEIN TO NETWORK THEORY | 3 


trusted, filling with intimate details of their growing net­
work diagram.
The maps consistently pointed to two individuals, Rud­
man Ibrahim and Mohammed Ibrahim (Image 1.2b). Not 
high in the government hierarchy, they were Saddam’s sec­
ond-level bodyguards, serving as his driver, cook, or me­
chanic. Yet, Rudman had a heart attack and died within 
a few hours of his capture, without having a chance to re­
veal his secrets. Next the investigators turned to their net­
work diagram to identify individuals who could know the 
whereabouts of Mohammad, dubbed the fat man. He was 
not a major player in the regime’s power structure, hence 
while Saddam’s whereabouts were handled with fear, Mo­
hammed’s social ties were not as protected. Sure enough, 
once they found someone to turn Mohammad Ibrahim in, 
he revealed the spider hole that hid the dictator at a farm 
near the Tigris river. The capture of Saddam Hussein illus­
trates many issues that we will encounter as we delve into 
network theory:
• It shows the predictive power of networks, allowing even 
non experts to extract crucial information from them, as 
the soldiers did using Saddam’s social network.
• It underlines the need for accurate maps of the networks 
we study, and the often heroic difficulties encountered 
during the mapping process.
• It demonstrates the remarkable stability of these net­
works: the capture of Hussein was not based on fresh in­
telligence, but rather on his pre-invasion social links, un­
earthed from old photos stacked in his family album.
• It shows that the choice of network we focus on makes a 
huge difference: it took months for the military to realize 
that the hierarchical network that described the official or­
ganization of the Iraqi government was of no use when it 
came to Saddam Hussein’s whereabouts.
In many ways the network building exercise by the US mil­
itary, deployed to capture Saddam Hussein, was a primi­
tive one driven more by intuition and guesswork than hard 
science. The purpose of this book is to turn these insights 
into a robust theory and methodology, so that we can fully 
and repeatedly unleash their predictive power.
4 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 3
VULNERABILITY DUE TO INTERCONNECTIVITY
At a first look the two satellite maps of Image 1.3a/b are 
indistinguishable: lights shining brightly in highly pop­
ulated areas, and dark spaces marking vast uninhabited 
forests and oceans. Yet, upon closer inspection something 
strange becomes apparent. The light in several regions, 
Toronto, Detroit, Cleveland, Columbus, Long Island have 
simply disappeared. This is not a doctored shot from the 
next Armageddon movie but represents a real image of the 
US Northeast on August 14, 2003, the night of a blackout 
that left an estimated 45 million people in eight US states 
and another 10 million in Ontario without power. It illus­
trates a much ignored aspect of networks, one that will be 
an important theme in this book: vulnerability due to in­
terconnectivity.
The 2003 blackout is a typical example of a cascading fail­
ure. When a network acts as a transportation system, a lo­
cal failure shifts loads to other nodes. If the extra load is 
negligible, the rest of the system can seamlessly absorb it, 
and the failure remains effectively unnoticed. If the extra 
load is too much for the neighboring nodes to carry, they 
will either tip or redistribute the load to their neighbors. 
Either way, we are faced with a cascading failure, the mag­
nitude of which depends on the network position and ca­
pacity of the nodes that have been removed in the first and 
subsequent rounds. Case in point is electricity: as it cannot 
be stored, when a line goes down, its power must be shift­
ed to other lines. Most of the time, the neighboring lines 
have no difficulty carrying the extra load. If they do, they 
will also tip and redistribute their increased load to their 
neighbors.
Cascading failures can occur in most complex systems. 
They take place on the Internet, when traffic is rerouted to 
bypass malfunctioning routers, occasionally creating deni­
al of service attacks on routers that do not have the capacity 
to handle extra traffic. We witnessed one in 1997, when the 
International Monetary Fund pressured the central banks 
of several Pacific nations to limit their credit. There was 
a cascading failure behind the 2009-2011 financial melt­
down, when the US credit crisis paralyzed the economy 
of the globe, leaving behind scores of failed banks, corpo­
rations, and even bankrupt states. Cascading failures are 
occasionally our ally, however. The world wide effort to dry 
up the money supply of terrorist organizations is aimed at 
crippling terrorist networks, and doctors and researchers 
hope to induce cascading failures to kill cancer cells.
The Northeast blackout illustrates an important theme of 
this book: we must understand how the network structure 
affects the robustness of a complex system. We will there­
fore develop quantitative tools to assess the interplay be­
tween network structure and dynamical processes on net­
works and their impact on failures. Although such failures 
may appear chaotic and unpredictable, we will learn that 
they follow rather reproducible laws that can be quantified 
and even predicted using the tools of network science.
Image 1.3a, 1.3b
2003 North American blackout.
Uper Panel 
Satellite image of August 13, 2003: 9:29pm EDT 20 hours before.
Lower Panel 
Satellite image of August 14, 2003: 9:14pm EDT 5 hours after.
VULNERABILITY DUE TO INTERCONNECTIVITY | 5


“I think the next century will be the century of 
complexity.”
Stephen Hawking
We are surrounded by systems that are hopelessly com­
plicated, from the society, whose seamless functioning 
requires cooperation between billions of individuals, to 
communications infrastructures that integrate billions of 
cell phones with computers and satellites. Our ability to 
reason and comprehend the world around us is guaran­
teed by the coherent activity of billions of neurons in our 
brain. Our very existence is rooted in seamless interac­
tions between thousands of genes and metabolites with­
in our cells. These systems are collectively called complex 
systems. Given the important role they play in our life, in 
science and economy, the understanding, mathematical 
description, prediction, and eventually the control of such 
complex systems is one of the major intellectual and scien­
tific challenges of the 21st century.
The emergence of network theory, at the dawn of the 21st 
century is a vivid demonstration that science can live up to 
this challenge. Indeed, behind each complex system, there 
is an intricate network that encodes the interactions between 
the system’s components: 
The network describing the interactions between 
genes, proteins, and metabolites integrates the pro­
cesses behind living cells. 
The wiring diagram capturing the connections be­
tween neural cells holds the key to our understanding 
of brain functions. 
The sum of all professional, friendship, and family 
ties is the fabric of the society. 
The network describing which communication de­
vices interact with each other, capturing internet 
connections or wireless links, is the heart of the mod­
SECTION 4
NETWORKS AT THE HEART OF COMPLEX SYSTEMS
Box 1.1
com.plex
[adj., v. kuh m-pleks, kom-pleks; n. kom-pleks]
1) composed of many interconnected parts; compound; 
    composite: a complex highway system
 
2) characterized by a very complicated or involved arrangement 
    of parts, units, etc.: complex machinery
3) so complicated or intricate as to be hard to understand 
    or deal with: a complex problem
Source: Dictionary.com
Image 1.4
The subtle networks behind the economy.
A credit card, selected as the 99th object in the popular exhibition by the 
British Museum, entitled The History of the World in 100 Objects. This 
card is a vivid demonstration of the interconnected nature of the modern 
economy, creating subtle linkages that one normally does not even think 
of. The card was issued in the United Arab Emirates in 2009 by the Hong 
Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, commonly known HSBC, a Lon­
don based bank. The card functions through protocols provided by VISA, 
an USA based credit association. Yet, the card adheres to Islamic banking 
principles, which operates in accordance with Fiqhal-Muamalat (Islamic 
rules of transactions), most notably eliminating interest or riba. The card 
is not limited to muslims in the United Arab Emirates, but it is also offered 
to Muslim minorities in non-Muslim countries, and is used by many 
non-Muslims who agree with its strict ethical guidelines.
6 | NETWORK SCIENCE


ern communication system. 
The power grid, a network of generators and trans­
mission lines, supplies with energy virtually all mod­
ern technology. 
Trade networks maintain our ability to exchange 
goods and services, being responsible for the material 
prosperity that an increasing fraction of the world has 
enjoyed since WWII (Image 1.4). They also play a key 
role in the spread of  financial and economic crises. 
Networks are at the heart of some of the most revolutionary 
technologies of the 21st century, empowering everything 
from Google to Facebook, CISCO, and Twitter. At the end, 
networks permeate science, technology, and nature to a 
much higher degree than may be evident upon a casual in­
spection. Consequently, it is increasingly clear that we will 
never understand complex systems unless we gain a deep un­
derstanding of the networks behind them.
The scientific explosion that network science experienced 
during the first decade of the 21st century is rooted in the 
discovery that despite the apparent differences, the emer­
gence and evolution of different networks is driven by a 
common set of fundamental laws and reproducible mecha­
nism. Hence despite the amazing diversity in form, size, 
nature, age, and scope characterizing real networks, most 
networks observed in nature, society, and technology are 
driven by common organizing principles. In other words, 
once we disregard the nature of the components and their 
interactions, the obtained networks are more similar than 
different from each other. In the following sections, we 
discuss the forces that have led to the emergence of this 
new research field and its impact on science, technology, 
and society.
NETWORKS AT THE HEART OF COMPLEX SYSTEMS | 7


SECTION 5
TWO FORCES HELPED THE EMERGENCE
OF NETWORK SCIENCE
Why didn’t network science emerge two hundred years 
earlier? The networks it explores are by no means new: 
metabolic networks date back to the origins of life, with a 
history of four billion years, and the Internet is over four 
decades old. Furthermore, many disciplines, from bio­
chemistry to sociology, and brain science, have been deal­
ing with their notion of networks. Graph theory, a prolific 
subfield of mathematics, has focused on networks since 
1735. Why do we dare to call network science the science 
of the 21st century?
Something special happened at the dawn of the 21st cen­
tury that transcended individual research fields and cat­
alyzed the emergence of a new discipline (Image 1.5). To 
understand why this happened only now, and not two 
hundred years earlier, we need to discuss the forces that 
have contributed to the emergence of network science.
The emergence of network maps: To describe the be­
havior of a system consisting of hundreds to billions of in­
teracting components, we first need a map of the system’s 
wiring diagram. In a social system, this would require 
knowing the list of your friends, your friends’ friends, and 
so on. In the WWW, this map tells us which webpages 
link to each other. In the cell, this corresponds to a detailed 
list of binding interactions and reactions that the genes, 
proteins, and metabolites participate in. In the past, we ei­
ther lacked the tools to map these networks out, or it was 
difficult to keep track of the huge amount of data behind 
these maps. The emergence of the Internet, offering effec­
tive and fast data sharing methods, together with cheap 
digital storage, fundamentally changed this, allows us to 
collect, assemble, share, and analyze data pertaining to 
real networks.
While many of the canonical maps studied today in net­
work science were not collected with the purpose of study­
ing networks (Box 2), we witnessed an explosion of map 
making at the end of the 1990s. These offered detailed 
maps of the networks behind numerous complex system, 
from cell to the economy. Examples include the CAIDA or 
DIMES project aimed at obtaining an accurate map of the 
Internet [8]; the hundreds of millions of dollars spent by 
biologists to systematically map out protein-protein inter­
actions in human cells [6], or the Connectome project of 
the US National Institute of Health that aims to trace the 
neural connection in mammalian brains [7].
The universality of network characteristics: It is easy 
to list the differences between the various networks we 
encounter in nature or society: the nodes of the metabol­
ic network are tiny molecules and the links are chemical 
reactions governed by quantum mechanics; the nodes of 
the WWW are web documents and the links are URLs 
maintained by computer algorithms; the nodes of the so­
cial network are individuals, the links representing fam­
ily, professionals, friendship, and acquaintance ties. The 
processes that shape these networks also differ greatly: 
metabolic networks are shaped by billions of years of evo­
Image 1.5
The emergence of network science.
While the study of networks has a long history from graph theory to 
sociology, the modern chapter of network science emerged only during the 
first decade of the 21st century, following the publication of two seminal 
papers in 1998 [2] and 1999 [3]. The explosive interest in network science 
is well documented by the citation pattern of two classic network papers, 
the 1959 paper by Paul Erdős and Alfréd Rényi that marks the beginning 
of the study of random networks in graph theory [4] and the 1973 paper 
by Mark Granovetter, the most cited social network paper [5]. Both papers 
were hardly or only moderately cited before 2000. The  explosive growth 
of citations to these papers in the 21st century documents the emergence 
of network science, drawing a new, interdisciplinary audience to these 
classic publications.
8 | NETWORK SCIENCE


Box 1.2
The origins of network maps
Many of the maps studied today by network scientists were not 
generated with the purpose of studying networks: 
The list of chemical reactions that take place in a cell were 
discovered over a 150 year period by biochemists and biolo­
gists. In the 1990s they were collected in central databases, 
offering the first chance to assemble the networks behind 
a cell. 
The list of actors that play in each movie were traditionally 
scattered in books and encyclopedias. With the advent of the 
Internet, these disparate data were assembled into a cen­
tral database by imdb.com, mainly to feed the curiosity of 
movie aficionados. The database offered the first chance for 
network scientists to explore the structure of the affiliation 
network behind Hollywood. 
The detailed list of authors of millions of research papers 
were traditionally scattered in the table of content of thou­
sands of journals, but recently the Web of Science, Google 
Scholar, and other sites assembled them into comprehensive 
databases, easing the search for scientific information. 
In the hands of network scientists these databases turned into the 
first science collaboration maps. Hence, much of the early history of 
network science relied on the investigators’ ingenuity to recognize 
and extract the networks from existing datasets. Network science 
changed that: today well-funded research collaborations focus on 
map making from biology to the Internet.
lution; WWW is collectively built by the actions of mil­
lions of individuals; social networks are shaped by social 
norms whose roots go back thousands of years. Given this 
diversity in size, nature, scope, history, and evolution, one 
would not be surprised if the networks behind these sys­
tems would differ greatly. Yet, a key discovery of network 
science is that the architecture and the evolution of net­
works emerging in various domains of science, nature, and 
technology are rather similar to each other, allowing us to 
use a common set of mathematical tools to explore these 
systems. This universality is one of the guiding principle of 
this book: we will not only seek to uncover specific network 
properties, but we will aim to understand its origins, en­
coding the laws that shape network evolution, as well as its 
consequences in understanding network behavior.
TWO FORCES HELPED THE EMERGENCE OF NETWORK SCIENCE | 9


SECTION 6
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF NETWORK SCIENCE
Network science is distinguished, not only by its sub­
ject matter, but also by its methodology. In the following 
we briefly discuss the key characteristics of the approach 
network science adopted to understand complex systems, 
helping us better understand the domain we are about to 
embark on.
Interdisciplinary nature: Network science offers a lan­
guage through which different disciplines can seamlessly 
interact with each other. Indeed, cell biologists and com­
puter scientists alike are faced with the task of character­
izing the wiring diagram behind their system, extracting 
information from incomplete and noisy datasets, and the 
need to understand their systems’ robustness to failures or 
deliberate attacks. To be sure, each discipline brings along 
a different set of technical details and challenges, which 
are important on their own. Yet, the common character of 
the many issues various fields struggle with have led to a 
cross-disciplinary fertilization of tools and ideas. For ex­
ample, the concept of betweenness centrality that emerged 
in the social network literature in the 1970s, today plays a 
key role in identifying high traffic nodes on the Internet; 
algorithms developed by computer scientists for graph 
partitioning have found novel applications in cell biology.
Empirical, data driven nature: The tools of network 
science have their roots in graph theory, a fertile field of 
mathematics.  What distinguishes network science from 
graph theory is its empirical nature, i.e. its focus on data 
and utility. As we will see in the coming chapters, we will 
never be satisfied with developing the abstract mathemat­
ical tools to describe a certain network property. Each tool 
we develop will be tested on real data and its value will be 
judged by the insights it offers about a system’s structure 
or evolution.
Quantitative and mathematical nature: To contribute 
to the development of network science, it is essential to 
master the mathematical tools behind it. The tools of net­
work science borrowed the formalism to deal with graphs 
from graph theory and the conceptual framework to deal 
with randomness and seek universal organizing principles 
from statistical physics. Lately, the field is benefiting from 
concepts borrowed from engineering, control and infor­
mation theory, statistics and data mining, helping us ex­
tract information from incomplete and noisy datasets.
Computational nature: Finally, given the size of many 
of the networks we explore, and the exceptional amount of 
data behind them, network science offers a series of for­
midable computational challenges. Hence, the field has a 
strong computational character, actively borrowing from 
algorithms, database management and data mining. A se­
ries of software tools help practitioners with diverse com­
putational skills analyze networks.
10 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 7
THE IMPACT OF NETWORK SCIENCE
The impact of a new research field is measured both by its 
intellectual achievements as well as by the reach and the 
potential of its applications. While network science is a 
young field, its impact is everywhere around us, as we dis­
cuss below.
Economic Impact: From web search to social net­
working.
Some of the most successful companies of the 21st century, 
from Google to Facebook, from Cisco to Apple and Akamai, 
base their technology and business model on networks. 
Indeed, Google is not only the biggest network mapping 
operation, building a comprehensive map of the WWW, 
but its search technology relies on the network characteris­
tics of the Web. Networks have gained particular popular­
Image 1.6
The rise of social networking.
The popularity of the best known social networks, in terms of the number of users they attracted by the end of 2011 (vertical axis) shown as a function 
of their founding year (horizontal axis).
ity with the emergence of Facebook, the company with the 
oft-emphasized ambition to map out the social network of 
the whole planet. While Facebook was not the first social 
networking site, it is likely also not the last: an extensive 
ecosystem of social networking tools, from Twitter to Or­
kut, are attracting an impressive number of users (Image 
1.6). The tools developed by network science fuel these 
sites, aiding everything from friend recommendation to 
advertising.
Health: From drug design to metabolic engineering.
The human genome project, completed in 2001, offered 
the first comprehensive list of all human genes [9, 10]. Yet, 
to fully understand how our cells function, and the origin 
of disease, we need accurate maps that tell us how these 
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF NETWORK SCIENCE | 11


genes and other cellular components interact with each 
other. Most cellular processes, from the processing of food 
by our cells to sensing changes in the environment, rely on 
molecular networks. The breakdown of these networks is 
responsible for most human diseases. This has led to the 
emergence of network biology, a new subfield of biology 
that aims to understand the behavior of cellular networks. 
A parallel movement within medicine, called network 
medicine, aims to uncover the role of networks in human 
disease (Image 1.7a/b). Networks are particularly import­
ant in drug development. The ultimate goal of network 
pharmacology is to develop drugs that can cure diseases 
without significant side effects. This goal is pursued at 
many levels, from millions of dollars invested to map out 
cellular networks to the development of tools and databas­
es to store, curate, and analyze patient and genetic data. 
Several new companies take advantage of these opportuni­
ties, from GeneGo that aims to collect accurate maps of cel­
lular interactions from scientific literature to Genomatica 
that uses the predictive power behind metabolic networks 
to identify drug targets in bacteria and humans. Recently 
most major pharmaceutical companies have made signifi­
Image 1.7a, 1.7b
Networks in biology and medicine.
a) The cover of two issues of Nature Reviews Genetics, the top review 
journal in genetics. The cover from 2004, focuses on network biology [11], 
the cover from 2011 discuses network medicine [12].
b) The prominent role networks play in both cell biology and medical 
research is illustrated by the fact that the 2004 article on network biology 
is the second most cited article in the history of Nature Reviews Genetics. 
Image 1.8
The network behind a military engagement.
This diagram was designed during the Afghan war  to portray the American strategy in Afghanistan. While it has been occasionally ridiculed in the press, 
it portrays well the complexities and the interconnected nature of a military’s engagement.  (Image from New York Times)
12 | NETWORK SCIENCE


a special role in the history of epidemics: it was the first 
pandemic whose course and time evolution was accurate­
ly predicted months before the pandemic reached its peak 
(Image 1.9) [14]. This was possible thanks to fundamen­
tal advances in understanding the role of networks in the 
spread of viruses. Indeed, before 2000 epidemic model­
ing was dominated by compartment models, assuming 
that everyone can infect everyone else one word the same 
socio-physical compartment. The emergence of a net­
work-based framework has fundamentally changed this, 
offering a new level of predictability in epidemic phenom­
ena.
Today epidemic prediction is one of the most active appli­
cations of network science [15, 16]. It is the source several 
fundamental results, covered in this book, that are used to 
predict the spread of both biological and electronic virus­
es. The impact of these advances are felt beyond biological 
viruses. In January 2010 network science tools have pre­
dicted the conditions necessary for the emergence of virus­
es spreading through mobile phones [17]. The first major 
mobile epidemic outbreak that started in the fall of 2010 
in China, infecting over 300,000 phones each day, closely 
followed the predicted scenario.
Brain Research: Mapping neural network.
The human brain, consisting of hundreds of billions of 
interlinked neurons, is one of the least understood net­
works from the perspective of network science. The reason 
is simple: we lack maps telling us which neurons link to 
each other. The only fully mapped neural map available for 
research is that of the C.Elegans worm, with only 300 neu­
rons. Should detailed maps of mammalian brains become 
available, brain research could become the most prolific 
application area of network science. Driven by the poten­
tial impact of such maps, in 2010 the National Institutes 
of Health has initiated the Connectome project, aimed at 
developing the technologies that could provide an accurate 
neuron-level map of mammalian brains.
Management: Uncovering the internal structure 
                                of an organization.
While traditionally management uses the official chain of 
command to understand the inner structure of an organi­
zation, it is increasingly evident that the informal network, 
capturing who really communicates with whom, matters 
even more for the success of a company. Accurate maps of 
this network can expose lack of communication between 
key units, can identify individuals who play an outsize role 
in bringing different departments and products together, 
Image 1.9
Predicting the H1N1 epidemic.
The  predicted spread of the H1N1 epidemics during 2009, representing 
the first successful prediction of a pandemic. The project, relying on the 
details of the worldwide transportation networks, foresee that H1N1 will 
peak out in October 2009, in contrast with the normal January-February 
peaks of influenza. This meant that the vaccines planned for November 
2009 were too late, which was indeed the case. The success of this project 
shows the power of network science in facilitating advances in areas 
affected by networks.
Movie by D.Balcom, B.Gonçalves, H.Hu, and A.Vespignani.
cant investments in network and systems medicine, seeing 
it as the path towards future drugs.
Security: Fighting Terrorism.
Terrorism is one of the maladies of the 21st century, ab­
sorbing significant resources to combat it worldwide. 
Network thinking is increasingly present in the arsenal of 
various law enforcement agencies in charge of limiting ter­
rorist activities. It is used to disrupt the financial network 
of terrorist organizations, to map terrorist networks, and 
to uncover the role of their members and their capabilities. 
While much of the work in this area is classified, several 
success stories have surfaced. Examples include the use of 
social networks to capture Saddam Hussein or the capture 
of the individuals behind the March 11, 2004 Madrid train 
bombings through the examination of the mobile call net­
work. Network concepts have impacted military doctrine 
as well, leading to the concept of net-war, aimed at fighting 
low intensity conflicts and crime waged by terrorist and 
criminal networks that employ decentralized flexible net­
work structures [13]. One of the first network science pro­
grams at the college level was started at West Point, the US 
Army’s military academy. In 2009 the Army Research Lab 
and the Department of Defense devoted over $300 million 
to support network science centers across the US.
Epidemics: From forecasting 
                         to halting deadly viruses.
While the H1N1 pandemic was not as devastating as it was 
feared at the beginning of the outbreak in 2009, it gained 
THE IMPACT OF NETWORK SCIENCE | 13


and help higher management diagnose diverse organiza­
tional issues.  Furthermore, there is increasing evidence in 
the management literature that the position of an employ­
ee within this network correlates with his/her productivity 
[18].
Therefore, several dozen consulting companies have 
emerged with expertise to map out the true structure of 
an organization. Established consulting firms, from IBM 
to SAP, have added social networking capabilities to their 
consulting business. These companies offer a host of ser­
vices, from identifying opinion leaders to preventing em­
ployee churn and from identifying optimal groups for a 
task to modeling product diffusion (Image 1.10a/b/c/d). 
Hence lately network science tools are increasingly indis­
pensable in management and business, enhancing pro­
ductivity and boosting innovation within an organization.
Network science can therefore offer a microscope for high­
er management, helping them improve the company’s ef­
fectiveness by uncovering the true network behind any or­
ganization.
Image 1.10a
Understanding the inner workings of an organization.
The workforce of a Hungarian company with three main locations, one on Budapest, whose employees are shown in purple, and two manufacturing 
sites outside of the city, shown in yellow and blue. The company had a major internal communication problem: information that reached the workers 
about the intentions of the higher management often had nothing do to with the management’s real plans. Seeking to understand the source of this 
discrepancy, and looking for ways to embrace information flow within the company, the management turned to Maven 7, a social networking consulting 
company that applies network science in diverse organizational setting.
14 | NETWORK SCIENCE


Image 1.10b
Understanding the inner workings of an organization.
Having the list of the workers and their role in the company, together with the official hierarchy is not sufficient to understand how an organization 
works. For that we need to know who listens to whom, who is asking for advice from whom, eventually uncovering the paths through which knowledge 
and information travels within the organization. Hence Maven 7 developed an online platform to ask each employee whom do they turn to for advice 
when it comes to decisions impacting the company, from restructuring to advancement. This allowed them to build the map shown above, where two 
individuals are connected if one nominated the other as his/her source of information on organizational and professional issues.
The map identifies several highly influential individuals that are the hubs of the organization. The problem was that none of the hubs were part of the 
leadership.
Image 1.10c
Understanding the inner workings of an organization.
The position of the leadership within the company’s informal network is illustrated on this map, where we colored the nodes based on their company 
rank within the company. None of the company directors, including the CEO, shown in red, are hubs. Nor are the top managers, shown in blue. The hubs 
are managers, group leaders and associates, or workers. The biggest hub, hence the most influential individual, is an associate, shown as a gray node in 
the center.
THE IMPACT OF NETWORK SCIENCE | 15


Image 1.10d
Understanding the inner workings of an organization.
The image indicates that a significant fraction of employees are one to two links from the biggest hub. It turns out that he is the safety and environmen­
tal expert in the company, whose job is to visit each location and talk with most employees. There is only one part of the company he has no links to: the 
directors or the top management. With little access to the management and their intentions, he passes on information that he collects along his trail, 
effectively running a gossip center. 
How does one remedy this situation? Fire the biggest hub? He is not the problem and firing him would probably make the problem even more acute. 
The real issue is that higher management failed to put in place proper channels of communication, leaving behind a structural hole, which was natural­
ly filled by the environmental and safety manager. Offering him and the few other hubs access to the true information can fundamentally change the 
reliability of information within the company. Network science can therefore offer a potent microscope for higher management, helping them improve 
the company’s effectiveness by uncovering the true network behind an organization.
16 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 8
SCIENTIFIC IMPACT
Image 1.11
Complexity and network science.
The impact of network science can be put into perspective by looking at 
the citation patterns of the most cited papers in complexity. The study of 
complex systems in the 70s and 80s was dominated by Edward Lorenz’s 
1963 classic work on chaos [19], Kenneth G. Wilson’s renormalization 
group [20], and Mitchell Feigenbaum’s discovery of the bifurcation dia­
gram [21]. In the 1980s the community has shifted its focus on pattern 
formation, following Benoit Mandelbrot’s book on fractals [22] and 
Thomas Witten and Len Sander’s introduction of the diffusion limited 
aggregation mode [23]. Equally influential was John Hopfield’s paper on 
neural networks [24] and Per Bak, Chao Tang and Kurt Wiesenfeld’s paper 
on self-organized criticality [25]. These papers are continuing to define 
our understanding of complex systems, each of them writing a separate 
chapter in modern statistical mechanics. The video compare their citation 
pattern with the citations of the two most cited papers in this area [2,3].
Nowhere is the impact of network thinking more evident 
than in the scientific community. The most prominent sci­
entific journals, from Nature and Science to Cell and PNAS, 
have devoted special issues, reviews, or editorials address­
ing the impact of networks on various topics from biology 
to social sciences. During the past decade, each year several 
dozen international conferences, workshops, summer and 
winter schools have focused exclusively on network sci­
ence. A successful network science meeting series, called 
NetSci, attracts the field’s practitioners since 2005. Several 
general-interest books, making the bestseller lists in many 
countries, have brought network science to the public. 
Most major universities offer network science courses, at­
tracting a diverse student body. Finally, Science Magazine 
Several other metrics indicate that network science is im­
pacting in a defining manner particular disciplines. For 
example, several research fields witnessed network papers 
become some of the most cited papers in their leading 
journals:
The 1998 paper by Watts and Strogatz in Nature on 
small world phenomena [2] and the 1999 paper by 
has devoted a special issue to networks, marking the ten-
year anniversary of the paper that reported the discovery of 
scale-free networks [3] (Image 1.12).
The relative impact of network science can be put into per­
spective by looking at the citation patterns of the most cited 
papers in the area of complex systems (Image 1.11). Each 
of these papers are citation classics, cumulatively amassing 
anywhere between 2,000 and 5,000 citations, continuing 
to gather anywhere between 50 to 300 citations a year. To 
see how the interest in network science compares to these 
classic discoveries, in Movie 3 we also show the citation 
patterns of the two most cited network science papers: the 
1998 paper on small-world phenomena by Duncan Watts 
and Steve Strogatz [2] and the 1999 Science paper report­
ing the discovery of scale-free networks by Albert-László 
Barabási and Réka Albert [3]. As one can see, the growth in 
citations to these papers unparalleled in the area of com­
plex systems.
Image 1.12
Complex systems and networks.
Special issue of Science magazine 
on Complex Systems and Networks, 
published on July 24, 2009, marking the 
10th anniversary of the 1999 discovery of 
scale-free networks [3].
SCIENTIFIC IMPACT | 17


a paper on quantum computing.
The paper by Michelle Girvan and Mark Newman 
on community discovery in networks [30] is the most 
cited paper published in 2002 by Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The 2004 review entitled Network Biology, by Barabá­
si and Oltvai [11], is the second most cited paper in 
the history of Nature Reviews Genetics, the top review 
journal in genetics.
Given this extraordinary response by the scientific com­
munity, network science was examined by the Nation­
al Research Council (NRC), the arm of the US National 
Academies in charge of offering policy recommendation 
to the US government. NRC has assembled two panels, 
resulting in two publications [31], defining the field of 
network science (Image 1.13). They not only document the 
emergence of a new research field, but highlight the field’s 
vital importance to national competitiveness and security. 
Following these reports, the National Science Foundation 
(NSF) in the US established a network science directorate 
and a series of network science centers were established by 
the Army Research Labs.
General Audience
The results of network science have excited the public as 
well. This was fueled partly by the success of several gener­
al audience books, like Linked: The New Science of Networks 
by Albert-László Barabási, Nexus by Mark Buchanan, and 
Six Degrees by Duncan Watts, each being translated in 
many of languages. Newer books, like Connected by Nich­
olas Christakis and James Fowler, were also exceptionally 
successful (Image 1.15). An award-winning documenta­
ry, Connected, by Australian filmmaker Annamaria Talas, 
has brought the field to our TV screen, being broadcasted 
all over the world and winning several prestigious prizes 
(Image 1.14). Networks have inspired artists as well, lead­
ing to a wide range of network science research inspired 
art-project, and even an annual symposium series that 
Barabási and Albert in Science on scale-free net­
works [3] were identified by ISI as the top ten most 
cited papers in physics during the decade after their 
publications. Furthermore, currently (2011) the 
Watts-Strogatz paper is the second most cited of all 
papers published by Nature in 1998, and the Barabá­
si-Albert paper is the most cited paper among all pa­
pers published in Science in 1999.
Four years after its publication, the SIAM review of 
Mark Newman on network science became the most 
cited paper of any journal published by the Society of 
Industrial Mathematics [26].
Reviews of Modern Physics, published continuous­
ly since 1929, is the physics journal with the highest 
impact factor. Currently the most cited paper of the 
journal is Chandrasekhar classic 1944 review that 
summarized the author’s work that led to his Nobel 
in physics, entitled Stochastic Problems in Physics and 
Astronomy [27]. During over 60 years since its publi­
cation, the paper gathered over 5,000 citations. Yet, it 
will soon be taken over by a paper published only in 
2001 entitled Statistical Mechanics of Complex Net­
works, the first review of network science [28].
The paper leading to the discovery that in scale-free 
networks the epidemic threshold is zero, by Pas­
tor-Satorras and Vespignani [29], is the most cited 
paper among the papers published in 2001 by Physi­
cal Review Letters, a position the paper is sharing with 
Image 1.13
National Research Council Reports.
The two National Research Council Reports on network science have 
not only documented the emergence of a new discipline, but have also 
explained their long-term impact on a number of research fields, as well 
as national competitiveness and the military. They have urged dedicated 
support for the field, leading to the establishment of a series of network 
science centers in US and the network science program within NSF.
Image 1.14
Connected.
The trailer of the 
award winner docu­
ment Connected, di­
rected by Annamaria 
Talas, focusing on 
network science.
18 | NETWORK SCIENCE


brings together, on a yearly basis, artists and scientists [32]. 
Fueled by successful movies like The Social Network, and a 
series of novels and short stories, from science fiction to 
novels exploiting the network paradigm, today networks 
have permeated popular culture.
Image 1.15
Wide impact.
Four widely read books are bringing network science to the public.
SCIENTIFIC IMPACT | 19


SECTION 9
SUMMARY
While the emergence of the scientific interest in networks 
was rather sudden, the enthusiasm for the field was re­
sponding to the emergence of a wider social awareness 
of the importance of networks. This is illustrated in Im­
age 1.16, where we show the usage frequency of the words 
that represent two important scientific revolutions of the 
past two centuries: evolution, capturing the most common 
term to refer to Darwin’s theory of evolution, and quantum, 
the most frequently used term when one refers to quan­
tum mechanics.  The use of evolution increases only after 
the 1859 publication of Darwin’s On the Origins of Species. 
The word quantum, first used in 1902, is virtually absent 
until the 1920s, when quantum mechanics gains promi­
nence. The use of the word network has increased dramat­
ically following the 1980s. While the word has many uses 
(as do evolution and quantum), its dramatic rise captures 
the extraordinary awareness of networks in the society at 
large. Indeed, evolution and quantum mechanics are just 
as important as core scientific fields, as they are as en­
abling platforms: the current revolution in genetics is built 
on evolutionary theory, and quantum mechanics offers a 
platform for a wide range of advances in contemporary 
science, from chemistry to wireless communications. In 
a similar fashion, network science is an enabling science, 
offering new tools and perspective for a wide range of sci­
entific fields from social networking to drug design. Given 
the wide importance and impact of networks, we need to 
develop the tools to study and quantify them. The rest of 
this book is devoted to this worthy subject.
Image 1.16
The rise of networks.
The frequency of the use of the words evolution and quantum represents 
the major scientific advances of the 19th and 20th century, namely Dar­
win’s theory of evolution and quantum mechanics. The plot indicates the 
exploding awareness of networks in the last decades of the 20th century, 
preparing a fertile ground for the emergence of network science. The plots 
were generated by using the ngram platform of Google: http://books.
google.com/ngrams.
20 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 10
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1] C. Wilson. Searching for Saddam: a five-part series on 
how the US military used social networking to capture the 
Iraqi dictator. 2010. www.slate.com/id/2245228/.
[2] D. J. Watts and S .H. Strogatz. Collective dynamics of 
‘small-world’ networks. Nature, 393 (440), 1998.
[3] A.-L. Barabási and R. Albert. Emergence of scaling in 
random networks, Science, 286 (509), 1999.
[4] P. Erdős and A. Rényi. On random graphs. Publicatio­
nes Mathematicae, 6 (290), 1959.
[5] M. S. Granovetter. The strength of weak ties. American 
Journal of Sociology, 78 (1360), 1973.
[6] K. Venkatesan, J.-F. Rual, A. Vazquez, U. Stelzl, I. Lem­
mens, T. Hirozane-Kishikawa, T. Hao, M. Zenkner, X. 
Xin, K.-I. Goh, M. A. Yildirim, N. Simonis, J. M. Sahalie, 
S. Cevik, C. Simon, A.-S. de Smet, E. Dann, A. Smolyar, 
A. Vinayagam, H. Yu, D. Szeto, H. Borick, A. Dricot, N. 
Klitgord, R. R. Murray, C. Lin, M. Lalowski, and J. Timm. 
An empirical framework for binary interactome mapping. 
Nature Methods, 6 (83), 2009.
[7] O. Sporns, G. Tononi, and R. Kötter. The Human Con­
nectome: A Structural Description of the Human Brain. PLoS 
Comput. Biol., 1 (4), 2005.
[8] http://www.caida.org/       http://www.netdimes.org/
[9] International Human Genome Sequencing Consor­
tium. Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome. 
Nature, 409 (6822), 2001.
[10] J. C. Venter et al.,The Sequence of the Human Genome, 
Science, 291 (1304), 2001.
[11] Z. N. Oltvai and A.-L. Barabási. Understanding the 
cell’s functional organization. Nature Reviews Genetics, 5 
(101), 2004.
[12] N. Gulbahce, A.-L. Barabási, and J. Loscalzo. Network 
medicine: a network-based approach to human disease. Na­
ture Reviews Genetics, 12 (56), 2011.
[13] J. Arquilla and D. Ronfeldt, Networks and Netwars: 
The Future of Terror, Crime, and Militancy (RAND: Santa 
Monica, CA), 2001.
[14] D. Balcan, H. Hu, B. Goncalves, P. Bajardi, C. Poletto, 
J. J. Ramasco, D. Paolotti, N. Perra, M. Tizzoni, W. Van 
den Broeck, V. Colizza, and A. Vespignani. Seasonal trans­
mission potential and activity peaks of the new influenza 
A(H1N1): a Monte Carlo likelihood analysis based on human 
mobility. BMC Medicine, 7 (45), 2009. 
[15] D. Balcan, V. Colizza, B. Gonçalves, H. Hu, and J. J. 
Ramasco, A. Vespignani, Multiscale mobility networks and 
the spatial spreading of infectious diseases. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci., 106 (21484) 2009.
[16] L. Hufnagel, D. Brockmann, and T. Geisel, Forecast 
and control of epidemics in a globalized world. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci., 101 (15124), 2004.
[17] P. Wang, M. Gonzalez, C. A. Hidalgo, and A.-L. 
Barabási. Understanding the spreading patterns of mobile 
phone viruses. Science, 324 (1071), 2009.
[18] L. Wu , B. N. Waber, S. Aral, E. Brynjolfsson, and 
A. Pentland, Mining Face-to-Face Interaction Networks 
using Sociometric Badges: Predicting Productivity in an IT 
Configuration Task, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=1130251
[19] E. N. Lorenz, Deterministic Non periodic Flow. J. At­
mos. Sci., 20 (130), 1963.
[20] K. G. Wilson, The renormalization group: Critical phe­
nomena and the Kondo problem, Rev. Mod. Phys. 47 (773), 
1975.
[21] M. J. Feigenbaum, Quantitative Universality for a Class 
of Non-Linear Transformations. J. Stat. Phys. 19 (25), 1978.
[22] B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature. 
W.H. Freeman and Company. 1982
SUMMARY | 21


[23] T. Witten, Jr. and L. M. Sander, Diffusion-Limited Ag­
gregation, a Kinetic Critical Phenomenon. Phys. Rev. Lett., 
47 (1400), 1981.
[24] J. J. Hopfield, Neural networks and physical systems 
with emergent collective computational abilities, Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci., 79 (2554), 1982.
[25] P. Bak, C. Tang, and K. Wiesenfeld. Self-organized 
criticality: an explanation of 1/ƒ noise. Phys. Rev. Lett., 59 
(4), 1987.
[26] M. E. J. Newman. The structure and function of com­
plex networks, SIAM Review. 45 (167), 2003.
[27] S. Chandrasekhar. Stochastic Problems in Physics and 
Astronomy, Rev. Mod. Phys., 15 (1), 1943.
[28] R. Albert and A.-L. Barabási, Statistical mechanics of 
complex networks, Rev. Mod. Phys., 74 (47), 2002.
[29] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani. Epidemic 
spreading in scale-free networks. Phys. Rev. Lett., 86 (3200), 
2001.
[30] M. Girvan and M. E. J. Newman. Community struc­
ture in social and biological networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 
99 (7821), 2002.
[31] National Research Council, Network Science. Wash­
ington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2005.
National Research Council. Strategy for an Army Center 
for Network Science, Technology, and Experimentation . 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2007.
[32] M. Schich, R. Malina, and I. Meirelles (Editors), Arts, 
Humanities, and Complex Networks [Kindle Edition], 2012.
22 | NETWORK SCIENCE


CHAPTER 2
The bridges of Königsberg
Networks and graphs
Degree, average degree and degree 
distribution
Real networks are sparse
Adjacency Matrix
Weighted and unweighted net­
works
Bipartite networks
Paths and distances in networks
Connectedness and Components
Clustering coefficient
Case study and summary
Appendix A: Global clustering co­
efficient
Bibliography
GRAPH THEORY


SECTION 1
THE BRIDGES OF KÖNIGSBERG
Few research fields can trace their birth to a single moment 
and place in history. Graph theory, the mathematical scaf­
fold behind network science, can. Its roots go back to 1736 
to Königsberg, the capital of Eastern Prussia and a thriving 
merchant city of its time. The trade supported by its busy 
fleet of ships allowed city officials to build seven bridges 
across the river Pregel that surrounded the town. Five of 
these connected the elegant island Kneiphof, caught be­
tween the two branches of the Pregel, to the mainland; two 
crossed the two branches of the river (Image 2.1). This pe­
culiar arrangement gave birth to a contemporary puzzle: 
Can one walk across all seven bridges and never cross the 
same one twice? Despite many attempts, no one could find 
such path. The problem remained unsolved until 1735, 
when Leonard Euler, a Swiss born mathematician, offered 
a rigorous mathematical proof that such path does not ex­
ist.
Image 2.1
The bridges of Königsberg.
From the contemporary map of Königsberg (now Kaliningrad, Russia) to Euler’s graph. The graph constructed by Euler consists of four nodes (A, B, C, 
D), each corresponding to a patch of land, and seven links, each corresponding to a bridge. Euler showed in 1736 that there is no continuous path that 
would cross seven the bridges while never crossing the same bridge twice. The people of Königsberg agreed with him, gave up their fruitless search and 
in 1875 they built a new bridge between B and C, increasing the number of links of these two nodes to four. Now only one node was left with an odd 
number of links and it became rather straightforward to find the desired path.
Euler represented each of the four land areas separated by 
the river with letters A, B, C, and D. (Image 2.1). Next he 
connected with lines each piece of land that had a bridge 
between them. He thus built a graph, whose nodes were 
pieces of land and links were the bridges. Then Euler made 
a simple observation: if there is a path crossing all bridg­
es, but never the same bridge twice, then nodes with odd 
number of links must be either the starting or the end point 
of this path. Indeed, if you arrive to a node with an odd 
number of links you may eventually have no unused link 
for you to leave it. A continuous path that goes through all 
bridges can have only one starting and one end point. Thus 
such a path cannot exist on a graph that has more than two 
nodes with an odd number of links. The Königsberg graph 
had three nodes with an odd number of links, B, C, and D, 
so no path could satisfy the problem.
Euler’s proof was the first time someone solved a mathe­
24 | NETWORK SCIENCE


matical problem by turning it into a graph. For us the proof 
has two important messages: the first is that some prob­
lems become simpler and more treatable if they are rep­
resented as a graph. The second is that the existence of the 
path does not depend on our ingenuity to find it. Rather, 
it is a property of the graph. Indeed, given the structure of 
the Königsberg graph, no matter how smart we are, we will 
never find the desired path. In other words, networks have 
properties hidden in their structure that limit or enhance 
their behavior. To fully understand how networks affect the 
properties of a system, we need to become familiar with 
graph theory, a branch of mathematics that grew out of Eu­
ler’s proof, offering a formalism that will be used through­
out this book.
THE BRIDGES OF KÖNIGSBERG | 25


SECTION 2
NETWORKS AND GRAPHS
If we want to understand a complex system, we first need 
a map of its wiring diagram. A network is a catalog of a 
system’s components often called nodes or vertices and 
the direct interactions between them, called links or edg­
es (Box 2.1).
The network representation offers a common language to 
study systems that may differ greatly in nature, appearance, 
or scope. Indeed as shown in Image 2.3, three rather differ­
ent systems have exactly the same network representation.
Box 2.1
Networks or graphs?
In the scientific literature the terms network and graph are used 
interchangeably. Yet, there is a subtle distinction between the two 
terminologies: the network, node, and link combination often re­
fers to real systems: the WWW is a network of web pages con­
nected by URLs; society is a network of individuals connected by 
family, friendship or professional ties; the metabolic network is the 
sum of all chemical reactions that take place in a cell. In contrast, 
we use the terms graph, vertex, and edge when we talk about the 
mathematical representation of these networks: we talk about the 
web graph, the social graph (a term made popular by Facebook), or 
the metabolic graph. Yet, this distinction is rarely made, so these 
two terminologies are often used as synonyms of each other.
        Network Science	
Graph Theory
	
       network	
graph
	
            node	
vertex
	
              link	
edge
Image 2.3 also introduces two basic network parameters:
 
 Number of nodes, which we denote with N, represent­
ing the number of components in the system. We will of­
ten call N the size of the network.
 Number of links, which we denote with L, representing 
the total number of interactions between the nodes.
The networks shown in Image 2.1 all have N = 4 and L = 4. 
To distinguish the nodes, we label them i = 1, 2, ..., N. The 
links are rarely labeled, as they can be identified through 
the nodes they connect. For example, the (2, 4) link con­
nects nodes 2 and 4.
Image 2.3
Real systems of quite different nature can have the same 
network representation.
In the figure we show a small subset of (a) the Internet, where routers 
(specialized computers) are connected to each other; (b) the Hollywood 
actor network, where two actors are connected if they played in the same 
movie; (c) a protein-protein interaction network, where two proteins are 
connected if there is experimental evidence that they can bind to each 
other in the cell. While the nature of the nodes and the links differs wide­
ly, each network has the same graph representation, consisting of N = 4 
nodes and L = 4 links, shown in (d).
The links of a network can be directed or undirected. Some 
systems have directed links, like the WWW, whose uni­
form resource locators (URL) point from one web docu­
ment to the other, or phone calls, where one person calls 
the other. Other systems display undirected links, like ro­
mantic ties: if I date Janet, Janet also dates me, or trans­
mission lines on the power grid, on which the electric cur­
rent can flow in both directions.
A network is called directed (or digraph) if all of its links 
are directed or undirected if all of its links are undirected. 
Some networks simultaneously have directed and undi­
rected links. For example in the metabolic network some 
reactions are reversible (i.e. bidirectional or undirected) 
and others are irreversible, taking place in only one direc­
tion (directed).
Throughout this book we will use ten networks to illustrate 
the tools of network science. These networks, listed in Ta­
ble 2.1, were selected having diversity in mind, spanning 
social systems (mobile call graph or email network), col­
laboration and affiliation networks (science collaboration 
26 | NETWORK SCIENCE


NETWORK NAME
NODES
LINKS
DIRECTED/
UNDIRECTED
N
L
‹K›
Internet
routers
Internet Connections
Undirected
192,244
609,066
2.67
WWW
webpages
links
Directed
325,729
1,497,134
4.60
Power Grid
power plants, transformers
cables
Undirected
4,941
6,594
2.67
Mobile-Phone Calls
subscribers
calls
Directed
36,595
91,826
2.51
Email
email addresses
emails
Directed
57,194
103,731
1.81
Science Collaboration
scientists
co-authorships
Undirected
23,133
186,936
16.16
Actor Network
actors
co-acting
Undirected
212,250
3,054,278
28.78
Citation Network
papers
citations
Directed
449,673
4,707,958
10.47
E. coli Metabolism
metabolites
chemical reactions
Directed
1,039
5,802
5.84
Yeast Protein Interactions
proteins
binding interactions
Undirected
2,018
2,930
2.90
network, Hollywood actor network), information systems 
(WWW), technological and infrastructural systems (In­
ternet and power grid), biological systems (protein inter­
action and metabolic network), and reference networks 
(citations). They differ widely in their sizes, from as few 
as N =1,039 nodes and L = 5,802 links in the E. coli me­
tabolism, to almost half million nodes and five million 
links in the citation network. They cover several of the ar­
eas where networks are actively applied, representing ‘ca­
nonical’ datasets, often used by researchers in the field of 
network science to illustrate key network properties. In the 
coming chapters we will discuss in detail the nature and 
the characteristics of each of these datasets, turning them 
into the guinea pigs of our journey to understand complex 
networks.
Table 2.1
Network maps and their basic properties.
The basic characteristics of the networks that we use throughout this book to illustrate the use of network science. This table lists the nature of their 
nodes and links, indicating if links are directed or undirected, the number of nodes (N) and links (L), and the network’s average degree. For directed net­
works the average degree equals the average in- and out-degrees as ‹k› = <kin>=<kout>.
Box 2.2
Choosing the proper network representation.
The choices we make when we represent a complex system as a network will determine our ability to use network science successfully. For ex­
ample, the way we define the links between two individuals dictates the nature of the questions we can explore:
 By  connecting individuals that regularly interact with each other in the context of their work, we obtain the professional network, that 
plays a key role in the success of a company or an institution, and it is of major interest to organizational research.
 By linking friends to each other, we obtain the friendship network, that plays an important role in the spread of ideas, products and habits 
and is of major interest to sociology, marketing and health sciences.
 By  connecting individuals that have an intimate relationship, we obtain the sexual network, of key importance for the spread of sexually 
transmitted diseases, like AIDS, and of major interest for epidemiology.
 By  using phone and email records to connect individuals that call or email each other, we obtain the acquaintance network, capturing a 
mixture of professional, friendship or intimate links, of importance to communications and marketing.
While  many links in these four networks overlap (some coworkers may be friends or may have an intimate relationship), these networks are not 
identical. Other networks may be valid from a graph theoretic perspective, but may have little practical utility. For example, by linking all indi­
viduals with the same first name, Johns with Johns and Marys with Marys, we do obtain a well-defined network, yet its utility is questionable. 
Hence in order to apply network theory to a system, careful considerations must precede our choice of nodes and links, ensuring their significance 
to the problem we wish to explore.
NETWORKS AND GRAPHS | 27


SECTION 3
DEGREE, AVERAGE DEGREE, AND DEGREE DISTRIBUTION
A key property of each node is its degree, representing the 
number of links it has to other nodes. The degree can rep­
resent the number of mobile phone contacts an individual 
has in the call graph (i.e. the number of different individ­
uals the person has talked to), or the number of citations a 
research paper gets in the citation network.
We denote with ki the degree of the ith node in the network. 
For example, for the undirected networks shown in Image 
2.3 we have k1=2, k2=3, k3=2, k4=1.
In an undirected network total number of links, L, can be 
expressed as the sum of the node degrees: 
	
	
	
	
￼
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(1)
Here the 1/2 factor corrects for the fact that in the sum (1) 
each link is counted twice. For example, the link connect­
ing the nodes 2 and 4 in Image 2.3 will be counted once in 
the degree of node 1 (k2 = 3) and once in the degree of node 
4 (k4 = 1).
Brief statistics review.
The  average, the standard deviation, and the distribution of random vari­
ables will play a key role throughout this book. 
For a sample of N values x1, ... , xN  we have:
Average (mean value):
￼		
	
	
	
	
(2)
nth moment:
￼		
	
	
	
	
(3)
Standard deviation (fluctuations around the average):
￼		
	
	
	
	
(4)
Distribution of x (probability that a randomly chosen value is a):
￼		
	
	
	
	
(5)
which yields
￼		
	
	
	
	
(6)
An important property of a network is its average degree, 
which for an undirected network is
	
	
	
￼
	
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(7)
In directed networks we distinguish between incoming de­
gree, ki
in, representing the number of links that point node 
i, and outgoing degree, ki
out , representing the number of 
links that point from the node i to other nodes and the total 
degree, ki , given by
	
	
	
￼
	
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(8)
For example, on the WWW the number of pages a giv­
en document points to represents its outgoing degree, kout, 
and the number of other documents that point to it rep­
resents its incoming degree, kin.
The total number of links in a directed network is￼
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
(9)
The 1/2 factor in Eq. (1), is absent above, as for directed 
networks the two sums in (9) separately count the outgo­
ing and the incoming degrees. 
The average degree of a directed network is
￼		
	
	
	
	
	
	
             .	(10)
The degree distribution, pk, provides the probability that a 
randomly selected node in the network has degree k. Since 
pk
 is a probability, it must be normalized, i.e.    ￼
             . For 
a fixed network of N nodes the degree distribution is the 
normalized histogram (see Gallery 2.1),
	
	
	
	
          ,
where Nk is the number of degree k nodes. Hence the 
number of degree k nodes can be obtained from the degree 
distribution as Nk = Npk. 
∑
=
=
L
k
1
2
i
i
N
1

∑
=
+
+
+
=
=
x
x
x
x
N
N
x
1
N
i
i
N
1
2
1

∑
=
+
+
+
=
=
x
x
x
x
N
N
x
1
n
n
n
N
n
i
i
N
1
2
1
∑
σ
(
)
=
−
=
N
x
x
1
x
i
i
N
2
1
∑
∫(
)
=
=
p
p dx
1
1
x
i
x
∑δ
=
p
N
1
x x
i
, i
Box 2.3
∑
≡
=
=
k
N
k
L
N
1
2
i
i
N
1
=
+
k
k
k
i
i
in
i
out
∑
∑
=
=
=
=
L
k
k
i
in
i
N
i
out
i
N
1
1
∑
∑
=
=
=
=
=
=
k
N
k
k
N
k
L
N
(
)
1
(
)
1
in
i
in
i
N
out
i
out
i
N
1
1
∑
=
=
∞
p
1
k
k 1
=
p
N
N
k
k
28 | NETWORK SCIENCE


The degree distribution has taken a central role in net­
work theory following the discovery of scale-free networks 
(Barabási & Albert, 1999). Another reason for its impor­
tance is that the calculation of most network properties re­
quires us to know pk. For example, the average degree of a 
network can be written as
	
	
	
	
	
￼	
We will see in the coming chapters that the precise func­
tional form of pk determines many network phenomena, 
from network robustness to the spread of viruses.
∑
=
=
∞
k
kpk
k 0
Image 2.4a
Degree distribution.
The  degree distribution is defined as the pk = Nk /N ratio, where Nk denotes 
the number of k-degree nodes in a network. For the network in (a) we 
have N = 4 and p1 = 1/4 (one of the four nodes has degree k1 = 1), p2 = 
1/2 (two nodes have k3 = k4 = 2), and p3 = 1/4 (as k2 = 3). As we lack nodes 
with degree k > 3, pk = 0 for any k > 3. Panel (b) shows the degree distri­
bution of a one dimensional lattice. As each node has the same degree k = 
2, the degree distribution is a Kronecker’s delta function pk = d(k - 2).
Image 2.4b
  
In  many real networks, the node degree can vary considerably. For exam­
ple, as the degree distribution (a) indicates, the degrees of the proteins in 
the protein interaction network shown in (b) vary between k=0 (isolated 
nodes) and k=92, which is the degree of the largest node, called a hub. 
There are also wide differences in the number of nodes with different 
degrees: as (a) shows, almost half of the nodes have degree one (i.e. 
p1=0.48), while there is only one copy of the biggest node, hence p92 = 1/
N=0.0005.  (c) The degree distribution is often shown on a so-called log-
log plot, in which we either plot log pk in function of log k, or, as we did in 
(c), we use logarithmic axes. 
DEGREE, AVERAGE DEGREE, AND DEGREE DISTRIBUTION | 29


SECTION 4
REAL NETWORKS ARE SPARSE
In real networks the number of nodes (N) and links (L) can 
vary widely. For example, the neural network of the worm 
C. elegans, the only fully mapped brain of a living organ­
ism, has 297 neurons (nodes) and 2,345 synapses (links), 
while a human brain is estimated to have about a hundred 
billion (1011) neurons, each with an average of 7,000 syn­
aptic connections. The genetic network of a human cell has 
about 20,000 genes as nodes; the social network consists 
of seven billion individuals (N   7×109) and the WWW is 
estimated to have over a trillion webpages (N>1012). These 
wide differences in size are noticeable in Table 2.1 where 
we list N and L for several network maps. Some of these 
maps offer a complete wiring diagram of the system they 
describe (like the actor network or the E. Coli metabolism), 
others are only samples, representing a subset of a real sys­
tem’s nodes (WWW, mobile call graph).
Table 2.1 indicates that the number of links also varies 
widely. In a network of N nodes the number of links is be­
tween L = 0 and Lmax, where Lmax is the total number of links 
present in a complete graph (Image 2.5),
	
	
	
￼
	
		
(11)
a graph in which each node is connected to all other nodes.
In real networks L is much smaller than Lmax, indicating 
that real networks are sparse. For example, the WWW 
graph in Table 2.1 has about 1.5 million links. Yet, if the 
WWW were to be a complete graph, this sample should 
have Lmax ≈ 1012 links according to (11). 
Therefore, the web graph has only a 10-6 fraction of the 
links it could have, making it a sparse network. In fact each 
network in Table 2.1 has only a tiny fraction of the links it 
could have according to (11). As we will see later sparse­
ness has important consequences on the way we explore 
and store real networks.
= 


=
−
L
N
N N
2
(
1)
2
max

Image 2.5
Complete graph.
The figure shows a complete graph with N = 16 nodes and Lmax = 120 links, 
as predicted by Eq. (11). The adjacency matrix of a complete graph is Aij = 
1 for all i, j = 1, ....N and Aii = 0. The average degree of a complete graph is 
‹k› = N - 1.
30 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 5
ADJACENCY MATRIX
A full description of a network requires us to keep track of 
its links. The simplest way to achieve this is to provide a 
complete list of the links. For example, the network of Im­
age 2.1 is uniquely described by the list of its four (i, j) links: 
{(1, 2), (1, 3), (2, 3), (2, 4)}. 
For mathematical purposes we often represent a network 
through its adjacency matrix. The adjacency matrix of a di­
rected network of N nodes has N rows and N columns, its 
elements being:
Aij = 1 if there is a link pointing from node j to node i
Aij = 0 if nodes i and j are not connected to each other.
The adjacency matrix of an undirected  network has two 
entries for each link, e.g. link (1,2) is represented as A12 =1 
and A21 =1. Hence the adjacency matrix of an undirected 
network is symmetric, i.e. Aij = Aij (Image 2.7).
The degree ki of node i can be directly obtained from the el­
ements of the adjacency matrix. For undirected networks a 
node’s degree is a sum over either the rows or the columns 
of the matrix, i.e.
	
	
	
	
￼	
.	
(12)
For directed networks the sums over the adjacency matrix’ 
rows and columns provide the incoming and outgoing de­
grees, respectively
	
	
	￼
            
￼	
            .	 (13)
Given that in an undirected network the number of out­
going links equals the number of incoming links, we have
	
	
	
￼
	
		
(14)
The number of nonzero elements of the adjacency matrix 
is 2L, or twice the number of links. Indeed, an undirected 
link connecting nodes i and j appears in two entries: 
Aij = 1, a link pointing from node j to node i, and Aji = 1, and 
a link pointing from i to j (Image 2.7).
∑
∑
=
=
=
=
k
A
A
i
ij
j
N
ij
i
N
1
1
The sparsity of real networks implies that the adjacency 
matrices are also sparse. Indeed, a complete network has 
Aij = 1, for all (i, j), i.e. each of its matrix elements are equal 
to one. In contrast in real networks only a tiny fraction of 
the matrix elements are nonzero. This is illustrated in Im­
age 2.6, where we show the adjacency matrix of the pro­
tein-protein interaction network listed in Table 2.1. One 
can see that the matrix appears nearly empty. One imme­
diate consequence of the sparseness is that when we store 
a large network in our computer, it is better to store only 
the list of links (i.e. elements for which Aij ≠ 0), rather than 
full adjacency matrix, as an overwhelming fraction of Aij 
elements are zero.
∑
=
=
k
A
i
in
ij
j
N
1
∑
=
=
k
A
i
out
ij
i
N
1
∑
∑
∑
=
=
=
=
=
L
k
k
A
2
i
in
i
N
i
out
j
N
ij
ij
N
1
1
Image 2.6
The adjacency matrix is typically sparse.
The adjacency matrix of the yeast protein-protein interaction network, 
consisting of 2,018 nodes, each representing a yeast protein (Table 2.1). 
A dot is placed on each spot of the adjacent matrix for which Aij = 1, 
indicating the presence of an interaction. There are no dots for Aij = 0. The 
small fraction of dots underlines the sparse nature of the protein-protein 
interaction network.
ADJACENCY MATRIX | 31


=












A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
ij
11
12
13
14
21
22
23
24
31
32
33
34
41
42
43
44
=










A
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
ij
=










A
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
ij
∑
∑
=
=
=
=
=
k
A
A
3
j
j
i
i
2
2
1
4
2
1
4
∑
=
=
=
k
A
2
in
j
j
2
2
1
4
∑
=
=
=
k
A
1
out
i
i
2
2
1
4
=
A
A
ij
ji
=
A
0
ii
≠
A
A
ij
ji
=
A
0
ii
∑
=
=
L
A
1
2
ij
i j
N
,
1
=
k
L
N
2
∑
=
=
L
Aij
i j
N
,
1
=
=
k
k
L
N
in
out
Image 2.7
The adjacency matrix.
Top: The  elements of the adjacency matrix. The adjacency matrix of a directed (left column) and an undirected (right column) network. The figure high­
lights the fact that the degree of a node (in this case node 2) can be expressed as the sum over the appropriate column or row of the adjacency matrix. 
It also shows a few basic network characteristics, like the total number of links, (L), and average degree, (‹k›), expressed in terms of the elements of the 
adjacency matrix.
Adjacency matrix
	
   	
Undirected network	
Directed network
1
3
2
4
1
3
2
4
32 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 6
WEIGHTED AND UNWEIGHTED NETWORKS
So far we discussed only networks for which all links have 
the same weight, i.e. Aij = 1. Yet, in many applications we 
need to study weighted networks, where each link (i, j) has 
a unique weight wij . In mobile call networks the weight can 
represent the total number of minutes two mobile phone 
users talk with each other on the phone; on the power grid 
the weight is the amount of current flowing through a 
transmission line.
=
A
w
ij
ij
Box 2.4
The value of a network: Metcalfe’s Law.
Metcalfe’s law states that the value of a network is proportional to the 
square of the number of its nodes, i.e. N2. Formulated around 1980 in the 
context of communication devices by Robert M. Metcalfe (Gilder, 1993), 
the idea behind Metcalfe’s law is that the more individuals use a network, 
the more valuable it becomes. Indeed, the more of your friends use email, 
the more valuable it is to you as well, as the more individuals you can 
communicate with.
During the Internet boom of the late 1990s Metcalfe’s law was frequently 
used to offer a quantitative valuation for Internet companies, supporting 
a “build it and they will come” mentality (Briscoe et al., 2006). It suggest­
ed that the value of a service is proportional to the square of the number 
of its users, in contrast with the cost that grows only linearly. Hence if 
the service attracts sufficient number of users, it will inevitably become 
profitable, as N2 will surpass N at some sufficiently large N. Hence Met­
calfe’s Law offered credibility to growth over profits, fueling the Internet 
bubble of 2001.
Metcalfe’s law is based on Eq. (11), telling us that if all links of a com­
munication network with N nodes are equally valuable, the total value of 
the network is proportional to N(N - 1)/2, that is, roughly, N2. If a network 
has N = 10 members, there are Lmax = 45 different possible connections 
between them. If the network doubles in size to N = 20, the number of 
connections doesn’t merely double but roughly quadruples to 190, a phe­
nomenon called network externality in economics.
Two issues limit the validity of Metcalfe’s law: (i) most real networks are 
sparse, which means that only a very small fraction of the links are pres­
ent. Hence the total value of the network will not grow like N2, but the 
growth is often only linear in N. (ii) As the links have weights, not all links 
are of equal value; some links are used heavily while the vast majority of 
links are rarely utilized.
Image 2.8
According to Metcalfe’s law the cost of network based services and 
products increases linearly with the number of nodes (users or devices) 
while the benefits or income is driven by the number of links Lmax the 
technology makes possible, growing like N2. Hence once the number of 
devices exceeds some “critical mass crossover”, the technology becomes 
profitable.
For weighted networks the elements of the adjacency ma­
trix carry the weight of the link
	
	
	
	
	
￼
	
		
	
	
	
	
       .	
	
(15)
Most networks of scientific interest are weighted, but we 
can not always measure the appropriate weights, hence we 
often approximate these networks as unweighted. In this 
book we predominantly focus on unweighted networks, 
but we will devote a separate chapter to network character­
istics that are unique to weighted networks.
WEIGHTED AND UNWEIGHTED NETWORKS | 33


SECTION 7
BIPARTITE NETWORKS
A bipartite graph (or bigraph) is a network whose nodes 
can be divided into two disjoint sets U and V such that each 
link connects a U-node to a V-node. In other words, if we 
color the U-nodes yellow and the V-nodes green, then 
each link must connect nodes of different colors (Image 
2.9a/b).
We can generate two projections for each bipartite net­
work. The first projection connects two U-nodes to each 
other by a link if they are linked to the same V-node in the 
bipartite representation; the second projection connects 
the V-nodes to each other by a link of they connect to the 
same U-node.
In network theory we encounter numerous bipartite net­
works. A well-known example is the Hollywood actor 
network, in which one set of nodes corresponds to movies 
(U), and the other to actors (V), a movie being connected 
Image 2.9a
Bipartite network.
In a bipartite network we have two sets of nodes, U and V, so that nodes 
in the U-set connect directly only to nodes in the V-set. Hence there are 
no direct U-U or V-V links. The figure also shows the two projections 
we can generate from any bipartite network. Projection U is obtained by 
connecting two U-nodes to each other if they link to the same V-node in 
the bipartite representation. Projection V is obtained by connecting two 
V-nodes to each other if they link to the same U-node in the bipartite 
network.
Image 2.9b
Bipartite network.
The human diseaseome is a bipartite network, whose nodes are diseases 
(U) and genes (V), in which a disease is connected to a gene if mutations 
in that gene are known to affect the particular disease [4]. One projection 
of the diseaseome is the gene network, whose nodes are genes, two genes 
being connected if they are associated with the same disease. The second 
projection is the disease network, whose nodes are diseases, two diseases 
being connected if the same genes are associated with them, indicating 
that the two diseases have common genetic origins. The figure shows a 
subset of the diseaseome, focusing on cancers. The full human diseaseome 
map, connecting 1,283 disorders via 1,777 shared disease genes. (After [4])
to an actor if the actor plays in that movie. In this network 
one projection corresponds to the actor network, in which 
two nodes are connected to each other if they played in 
the same movie; this is the network characterized in Table 
2.1. The other projection is the movie network, in which 
two movies are connected if they share at least one actor 
in their cast. Another example of bipartite network emerg­
es in medicine, connecting diseases to the genes whose 
effects can cause or influence the corresponding disease 
(Image 2.9a/b). Finally, one can also define  multipartite 
networks, like the tripartite recipe-ingredient-compound 
network described in Image 2.10 a/b.
34 | NETWORK SCIENCE


Chicken 
Marsala
Glazed 
Carrots
phenethyl alcohol
pyrrolidine
decanoic acid
9-decanoic acid
3-methyl-2-butanol
acetoin
m-cresol
o-cresol
delta-tetracalactone
styrene
l-aspartic acid
hydrogen sulﬁde
propenyl propyl disulﬁde
geraniol
butyraldehyde
butter
chicken
ﬂour
sage
wine
carrot
vinegar
chive
...
...
...
Recipes
Ingredients
Compounds
150
50
10
Fruits
Dairy
Spices
Alcoholic beverages
Nuts and seeds
Seafoods
Meats
Herbs
Plant derivatives
Vegetables
Flowers
Animal products
Plants
Cereal
50 %
30 %
10 %
1 %
Categories
Prevalence
Shared 
compounds
almond
leek
blueberry
wood
caviar
fish
mandarin
roquefort cheese
bacon
romano cheese
lemongrass
apricot
olive
herring
rutabaga
parsnip
camembert cheese
kiwi
turnip
egg noodle
black sesame seed
red algae
saffron
truffle
smoked salmon
peanut oil
celery oil
cassava
sturgeon caviar
cheddar cheese
mango
smoke
licorice
beef broth
sheep cheese
emmental cheese
butter
gin
munster cheese
tarragon
salmon
macaroni
orange juice
hop
matsutake
black pepper
black raspberry
sage
thyme
currant
carrot
cacao
porcini
hazelnut
haddock
scallop
date
rum
berry
zucchini
cucumber
lettuce
marjoram
litchi
roasted meat
passion fruit
horseradish
sassafras
port wine
sour milk
bean
ginger
seed
huckleberry
peanut butter
holy basil
sour cherry
cumin
smoked fish
lentil
cherry brandy
banana
mung bean
bourbon whiskey
jasmine tea
barley
cilantro
cod
cocoa
nut
parmesan cheese
black mustard seed oil
grape brandy
thai pepper
mate
baked potato
cashew
pear
ham
pimenta
catfish
yogurt
nira
roasted sesame seed
root
cream cheese
provolone cheese
shiitake
leaf
basil
parsley
pimento
sea algae
mussel
chicken liver
gruyere cheese
oregano
shallot
orange
fruit
green tea
balm
pumpkin
eel
roasted almond
coffee
carnation
pecan
artemisia
lavender
salmon roe
cream
palm
black tea
carob
asparagus
veal
cardamom
jamaican rum
turmeric
mushroom
cayenne
sake
concord grape
dill
prawn
bartlett pear
corn
frankfurter
cabernet sauvignon wine
cane molasses
red kidney bean
pear brandy
champagne wine
galanga
scallion
white bread
caraway
bone oil
onion
roasted hazelnut
endive
mandarin peel
lime juice
shrimp
lima bean
walnut
peach
star anise
strawberry jam
lamb
crab
goat cheese
tamarind
orange flower
citrus
pork liver
white wine
potato
raisin
yam
watermelon
pineapple
black bean
red bean
popcorn
okra
chinese cabbage
peanut
fennel
red wine
whiskey
tomato
garlic
juniper berry
tangerine
coconut oil
bell pepper
durian
macadamia nut
lemon juice
honey
swiss cheese
cider
bread
milk
cognac
yeast
tomato juice
flower
clove
corn flake
wine
raw beef
sesame oil
corn grit
brassica
cinnamon
papaya
raspberry
avocado
ouzo
katsuobushi
kumquat
roasted nut
spearmint
anise seed
strawberry
plum
rose
brown rice
soybean oil
melon
cabbage
bay
cauliflower
laurel
vegetable
pistachio
kohlrabi
prickly pear
fenugreek
lemon
bergamot
cranberry
enokidake
coconut
sauerkraut
apple brandy
rhubarb
buttermilk
lovage
roasted beef
brandy
chicken
blue cheese
jasmine
shellfish
celery
lime peel oil
armagnac
squash
black currant
nutmeg
chervil
japanese plum
pea
whole grain wheat flour
mint
lime
roasted peanut
roasted pork
oat
tabasco pepper
feta cheese
tequila
malt
wheat bread
soybean
citrus peel
wasabi
chickpea
lard
grape juice
green bell pepper
quince
mustard
beef
milk fat
tea
egg
sweet potato
strawberry juice
sesame seed
beef liver
beet
beer
oyster
geranium
peppermint oil
rosemary
mutton
tuna
gardenia
sunflower oil
muscat grape
elderberry
mozzarella cheese
lingonberry
chicory
cured pork
chive
blackberry
rapeseed
coriander
lemon peel
mace
apple
pork
kale
rye bread
liver
kidney bean
savory
beech
vanilla
grapefruit
fig
chamomile
cottage cheese
nectarine
cheese
pepper
rye flour
chicken broth
buckwheat
potato chip
blackberry brandy
pork sausage
soy sauce
grape
kelp
seaweed
meat
broccoli
maple syrup
orange peel
lilac flower oil
brussels sprout
wheat
angelica
rice
mackerel
peppermint
lobster
smoked sausage
octopus
radish
watercress
cereal
squid
olive oil
bitter orange
anise
vegetable oil
cherry
artichoke
oatmeal
guava
roasted pecan
vinegar
violet
clam
sherry
turkey
chayote
Image 2.10a
Tripartite network.
The tripartite recipe-ingredient-compound network, in which one set of 
nodes are recipes, like Chicken Marsala, the second set corresponds to 
the ingredients each recipe has (like flour, sage, chicken, wine, and butter 
for Chicken Marsala), and the third set captures the flavor compounds, or 
chemicals that contribute to the taste of a particular ingredient.
Image 2.10b
Tripartite network.
A projection of the tripartite network, resulting in the ingredient network, often called the flavor network. Each node denotes an ingredient; the node 
color indicating the food category and node size reflects the ingredient prevalence in recipes. Two ingredients are connected if they share a significant 
number of flavor compounds, link thickness representing the number of shared compounds between the two ingredients (After [12]).
BIPARTITE NETWORKS | 35


SECTION 8
PATHS AND DISTANCES IN NETWORKS
In physical systems the components are characterized by 
obvious distances, like the distance between two atoms in 
a crystal, or between two galaxies in the universe. In net­
works distance is a challenging concept. Indeed, what is 
the distance between two webpages on the WWW, or two 
individuals who may or may not know each other? The 
physical distance is not relevant here: two webpages linked 
to each other could be sitting on computers on the opposite 
sides of the globe and two individuals, living in the same 
building, may not know each other. In networks physical 
distance is replaced by path length. A path is a route that 
runs along the links of the network, its length representing 
the number of links the path contains. A path can intersect 
itself and pass through the same link repeatedly (Image 
2.5). In network science paths play a central role, hence 
next we discuss some of their most important properties, 
many more being summarized in Gallery 2.4.
Shortest Path (or geodesic path) between nodes i and j 
is the path with fewest number of links (Image 2.5). The 
shortest path is often called the distance between nodes 
i and j, and is denoted by dij , or simply d. We can often 
find multiple shortest paths of the same length d between a 
pair of nodes (Image 2.5). The shortest path never contains 
loops or intersects itself.
In an undirected network dij = dji, i.e. the distance between 
node i and j is the same as the distance between node j and 
i. In a directed network often dij    dji. Furthermore, in a di­
rected network the existence of a path from node i to node j 
does not guarantee the existence of a path from j to i.
In real networks we frequently need to determine the dis­
tance between two nodes. For a small network, like the one 
shown in Image 2.5, this is an easy task. For a network of 
millions of nodes finding the shortest path between two 
nodes can be rather time consuming. The length of the 
shortest path and the number of such paths can be formal­
ly obtained from the adjacency matrix (Box 2.5). In prac­
≠
Image 2.11
The adjacency matrix is typically sparse.
(a) A path between nodes i0 and in is an ordered list of n links Pd = {(i0, i1), 
(i1, i2), (i2, i3), ... ,(in-1, in),}.The length of this path is d. The path shown in (a) 
follows the route 1→2→5→4→2→5→7, hence its length is n = 6.
(b) The shortest paths between nodes 1 and 7, representing the distance 
d17 , is the path with the fewest number of links that connect nodes 1 and 
7. There can be multiple paths of the same length, as illustrated by the 
two paths shown in different colors. The network diameter is the largest 
distance in the network, being dmax = 3 here. 
Box 2.5
Number of shortest paths between two nodes.
The number of shortest paths, Nij , between nodes i and j and the 
distance dij  between them can be determined directly from the 
adjacency matrix, Aij .
dij = 1: If there is a link between i and j, then Aij = 1 (Aij = 0 
otherwise).
dij = 2: If there is a path of length two between i and j, then 
the product of d elements Aik Akj = 1 (Aik Akj = 0 otherwise). 
The number of dij = 2 paths between i and j is
	
	
￼
	
		
(16)
where [...]ij denotes the (ij)th element of a matrix.
 dij = d: If there is a path of length d between i and j, then 
Aik ... Alj = 1 (Aik ... Alj = 0 otherwise). The number of paths of 
length d between i and j is
	
	
￼
	
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
    .	
(17)
Equation (17)  holds for both directed and undirected networks 
and can be generalized to multigraphs as well. The distance be­
tween nodes i and j is the path with the smallest d for which Nij
(d) 
> 0. Despite the mathematical elegancy of Eq. (17), faced with a 
large network, it is more efficient to use the breadth-first-search 
algorithm described in Box 2.6.
∑
=
= 

=
N
A A
A
ij
ik
k
N
kj
ij
(2)
1
2
= 

N
A
ij
d
d
ij
( )
36 | NETWORK SCIENCE


∑
〈〉=
−
=
d
N N
d
1
(
1)
i j
i j
N
,
,
1,
tice we most often use the breadth first search (BFS) algo­
rithm discussed in Box 2.6 and Gallery 2.5 to measure the 
distance between two nodes.
Network diameter: the diameter of a network, denot­
ed by dmax, is the maximal shortest path in the network. In 
other words, it is the largest distance recorded between any 
pair of nodes. One can verify that the diameter of the net­
work shown in Image 2.5 is dmax = 3. For larger graphs the 
diameter can also be determined using the breadth first 
search algorithm (Box 2.6).
Average path length, denoted by ‹d›, is the average dis­
tance between all pairs of nodes in the network. For a di­
rected network of N nodes, ‹d› is given by 
	
	
	
￼
	
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(18)
For an undirected network we need to multiply the r.h.s. of 
Eq. (18) by two.
We can use the BFS algorithm to determine the average 
path length for a large network. For this we first determine 
the distance between a node and all other nodes in the net­
work using the algorithm described in Box 2.6. We then 
determine the shortest path between a second node and all 
other nodes but the first one, a procedure that we repeat 
for all nodes. The sum of these shortest paths divided by 
Lmax provides the average path length.
Image 2.12
Pathology.
PATH: A sequence of nodes such 
that each node is connected to 
the next node along the path by 
a link. A path always consists of n 
nodes and n - 1 links. The length of 
a path is defined as the number of 
its links, counting multiple edges 
multiple times.
SHORTEST PATH (geodesic path, d): 
the path with the shortest distance 
d between two nodes. We will call 
it the distance between two nodes.
DIAMETER (dmax): the longest short­
est path in a graph, or the distance 
between the two furthest away 
nodes.
AVERAGE PATH LENGTH (‹d›): 
the average of the shortest paths 
between all pairs of nodes. 
CYCLE: a path with the same start 
and end node.
SELF-AVOIDING PATH: a path that 
does not intersect itself, i.e. the 
same node or link does not occur 
twice along the path. 
EULERIAN PATH: a path that tra­
verses each link exactly once. 
HAMILTONIAN PATH: a path that 
visits each node exactly once.
Box 2.6
Finding the shortest path: breath first search.
BFS is one of the most frequently used algorithms in network 
science. Similar to throwing a pebble in a pond and watching the 
ripples spread from the center, we start from a node and label its 
neighbors, then the neighbors’ neighbors, until we encounter the 
target node. The number of “ripples” needed to reach the target 
provides the distance. To be specific, the identification of the 
shortest path between node i and j follows the following steps 
(Gallery 2.5):
1. Start at node i.
2. Find the nodes directly linked to i. Label them distance “1” and 
put them in a queue.
3. Take the first node, labeled n, out of the queue (n = 1 in the first 
step). Find the unlabeled nodes adjacent to it in the graph. Label 
them with n + 1 and put them in the queue.
4. Repeat step 3 until you find the target node j or there are no 
more nodes in the queue.
5. The distance between i and j is the label of j. If j does not have a 
label, then dij = ∞.
The time complexity of the BFS algorithm, representing the 
approximate number of steps the computer needs to find dij on a 
network of N nodes and L links, is O (N  + L). It is linear in N and L 
as each node needs to be entered and removed from the queue at 
most once, and each link has to be tested only once.
PATHS AND DISTANCES IN NETWORKS | 37


Image 2.13
The BFS algo­
rithm applied to 
a small network.
Starting from the 
orange node, labeled 
”0”, we identify all 
its neighbors, label­
ing them ”1”. Then 
we label ”2” the un­
labeled neighbors of 
all nodes labeled ”1”, 
and so on, in each 
iteration increasing 
the labels, until no 
node is left unla­
beled. The length of 
the shortest path 
or the distance d0i 
between node 0 and 
some other node i in 
the network is given 
by the label on node 
i. For example, the 
distance between 
node 0 and the 
leftmost node is 
d03 = 3.
38 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 9
CONNECTEDNESS AND COMPONENTS
The phone would be of limited use as a communication 
device if we could not call any valid phone number; the 
email world be rather useless if we could send emails to 
only certain email addresses, and not to others. From a 
network perspective this means that the technology behind 
the phone or the Internet must be capable of establishing 
a path between any two devices or clients, like your phone 
and any other phone on the network or between yours and 
your acquaintance’s email address. This is in fact the key 
utility of most networks: they are built to ensure connect­
edness. In this section we discuss the graph-theoretic for­
mulation of connectedness. 
In an undirected network two nodes i and j are connected 
if there is a path between them on the graph. They are dis­
connected if such a path does not exist, in which case we 
have dij = ∞. This is illustrated in Image 2.14a, which shows 
a network consisting of two disconnected clusters. While 
there are paths between the nodes that belong to the same 
cluster (for example nodes 4 and 6), there are no paths be­
tween nodes that belong to different clusters (for example 
nodes 1 and 6).
A network is connected if all pairs of nodes in the network 
are connected. It is disconnected if there is at least one pair 
with dij = ∞. Clearly the network shown in Image 2.6a is 
disconnected, and we call its two subnetwork components 
(or clusters). A component is a subset of nodes in a net­
work, so that there is a path between any two nodes that 
belong to the component, but one cannot add any more 
nodes to it that would have the same property. If a network 
consists of two components, a properly placed single link 
can connect them, making the network connected (Image 
2.14b). Such a link is called a bridge. In general a bridge is 
any link that, if cut, disconnects the graph. 
While for a small network visual inspection can help us 
decide if it is connected or disconnected, for a network 
consisting of millions of nodes connectedness is a chal­
lenging question. Several mathematical tools help us iden­
tify the connected components of a graph:
For a disconnected network the adjacency matrix can 
be rearranged into a block diagonal form, such that 
all nonzero elements in the matrix are contained in 
square blocks along the matrix’ diagonal and all other 
elements are zero (Image 2.14a). Each square block 
will correspond to a component. We can use the tools 
of linear algebra to decide if the adjacency matrix is 
block diagonal, helping us to identify the connected 
components.
In practice, for large networks the components are 
more efficient identified using the breadth first 
search algorithm (Box 2.7).
Image 2.14
Connected and disconnected networks.
(a) The network consists of two disconnected components, i.e. there is a 
path between any pair of nodes in the (1,2,3) component, as well in the 
(4,5,6,7) component. However, there are no paths between nodes that 
belong to different connected components. The right panel shows the 
adjacently matrix of the network. If the network consists of disconnected 
components, the adjacency matrix can be rearranged into a block diagonal 
form, such that all nonzero elements of the matrix are contained in square 
blocks along the diagonal of the matrix and all other elements are zero. 
(b) The addition of one link, called a bridge, can turn a disconnected 
network into a single connected component. Now there is a path between 
every pair of nodes in the network. Consequently the adjacency matrix 
cannot be written in a block diagonal form.
CONNECTEDNESS AND COMPONENTS | 39


Box 2.7
Finding the connected components of a graph.
 1. Start from a randomly chosen node i and perform a 
BFS from this node (Box 2.6). Label all nodes reached this 
way with n = 1. By linking friends to each other, we obtain 
the friendship network, that plays an important role in the 
spread of ideas, products and habits and is of major interest 
to sociology, marketing and health sciences.
 2. If the total number of labeled nodes equals N, then the 
network is connected. If the number of labeled nodes is 
smaller than N, the network consists of several components. 
To identify them, proceed to step 3.
 3. Increase the label n → n + 1. Choose an unmarked node 
j, label it with n. Use BFS to find all nodes reachable from j, 
label them with n. Return to step 2.
40 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 10
CLUSTERING COEFFICIENT
The local clustering coefficient captures the degree to 
which the neighbors of a given node link to each other.  For 
a node i with degree ki the local clustering coefficient is de­
fined as [5].
	
	
	
	
￼
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(19)
where Li represents the number of links between the ki 
neighbors of node i. Note that Ci is between 0 and 1:
Ci = 0 if none of the neighbors of node i link to each 
other; 
Ci = 1 if the neighbors of node i form a complete 
graph, i.e. they all link to each other (Image 2.7). 
In general Ci is the probability that two neighbors of a 
node link to each other: C = 0.5 implies that there is a 
50% chance that two neighbors of a node are linked. 
In summary Ci measures the network’s local density: 
the more densely interconnected the neighborhood 
of node i, the higher is Ci.
The degree of clustering of a whole network is captured by 
the average clustering coefficient, <C>, representing the av­
erage of Ci over all nodes i = 1, ..., N [5],
	
	
	
	
￼
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
            .	 	
(20)
In line with the probabilistic interpretation <C> is the 
probability that two neighbors of a randomly selected node 
link to each other. 
While Eq. (19) is defined for undirected networks, the 
clustering coefficient can be generalized to directed and 
weighted [6,7,8,9]) networks as well. Note that in the net­
work literature one also often encounters the global clus­
tering coefficient, defined in Appendix A.
=
−
C
L
k k
2
(
1)
i
i
i
i
∑
=
=
C
N
C
1
i
i
N
1
Image 2.15
Clustering Coefficient.
The local clustering coefficient, Ci , of the central node with degree ki=4 
for three different configurations of its neighborhood. The clustering 
coefficient measures the local density of links in a node’s vicinity. The 
bottom figure shows a small network, with the local clustering coefficient 
of a node shown next to each node. Next to the figure we also list the 
network’s average clustering coefficient <C>, according to Eq. (20), and 
its global clustering coefficient C, declined in Appendix A, Eq. (21). Note 
that for nodes with degrees ki=0,1, the clustering coefficient is taken to be 
zero. 
CLUSTERING COEFFICIENT | 41


SECTION 11
CASE STUDY AND SUMMARY
The purpose of the crash course in graph theory offered in 
this chapter was to familiarize us with some of the basic 
graph theoretical concepts and tools that network science 
uses. They define a set of elementary network character­
istics, summarized in Image 2.16, that will serve as a lan­
guage through which we can explore real networks. Yet, 
many of the networks we study in network science consist 
of hundreds to millions of nodes and links (Table 2.1). To 
explore them, we need to go beyond the small graphs dis­
cussed in Image 2.16 and use the introduced measures to 
explore large networks. A glimpse of what we are about 
to encounter is offered in Image 2.17a, where we show 
the protein-protein interaction network of baker’s yeast, 
whose nodes are proteins, two proteins being connected 
if there is experimental evidence that they can bind (inter­
act) to each other. The network is obviously too complex 
to understand its properties through a visual inspection of 
its wiring diagram. We therefore need to use the tools of 
network science to characterize its topology. 
Let us use the measures we introduced so far to explore 
some basic characteristics of this network. The undirected 
network of Image 2.8a has N = 2,018 proteins as nodes and 
L=2,930 binding interactions as links. Hence the average 
degree, according to Eq. (7), is ‹k› = 2.90, suggesting that 
a typical protein interacts with approximately two to three 
other proteins. Yet, this number is somewhat misleading. 
Indeed, the degree distribution pk shown in Image 2.17b 
indicates that the vast majority of nodes have only a few 
links. To be precise, in this network 69% of nodes have 
fewer than three links, i.e. for these k < ‹k› . They coexist 
with a few highly connected nodes, or hubs, the largest 
having as many as 91 links. Such wide differences in node 
degrees is a consequence of the network’s scale-free prop­
erty, characterizing many real networks. We will see that 
the precise shape of the degree distribution determines a 
wide range of network properties, from the network’s ro­
bustness to node failures to the spread of viruses. 
The breath-ﬁrst-search algorithm helps us determine the 
network’s diameter, finding dmax = 14. We might be tempt­
ed to expect wide variations in d, as some nodes are close to 
each other, others, however, may be quite far. The distance 
distribution (Image 2.17c), indicates otherwise: pd has a 
prominent peak around ‹d› =5.61, indicating that most dis­
tances are rather short, being in the vicinity of ‹d›. Also, 
pd decays fast for large ‹d›, suggesting that large distances 
are essentially absent. Instead, the variance of the degrees 
is sd = 1.64, hence we have d= 5.61 ± 1.64, i.e. most path 
lengths are in the clise vicinity of ‹d› . These are manifes­
tations of the small world property, another common fea­
ture of real networks, indicating that most nodes are rather 
close to each other. 
The breath ﬁrst search algorithm will also convince us 
that the protein interaction network is not connected, but 
consists of 185 components, shown as isolated clusters in 
Image 2.17a. The largest, called the giant component, con­
tains 1,647 of the 2,018 nodes; all other components are 
tiny compared to it. As we will see in the coming chapters, 
such fragmentation is common in real networks. 
The average clustering coefficient of the network is <C> 
=0.12, which, as we will come to appreciate in the coming 
chapters, is rather large, indicating a significant degree of 
local clustering. A further caveat is provided by the depen­
dence of the clustering coefficient on the node’s degree, 
or the C(k) function (Image 2.17d), which indicates that 
the clustering coefficient of the small nodes is significant­
ly higher than the clustering coefficient of the hubs. This 
suggests that the small degree nodes are locates in dense 
local neighborhoods, while the neighborhood of the hubs 
is much more sparse. This is a consequence of network hi­
erarchy, another widely shared network property. 
Finally, a visual inspection reveals an interesting pattern: 
hubs have a tendency to connect to small nodes, giving the 
network a hub and spoke character. This is a consequence 
of degree correlations, which influence a number of net­
work characteristics, from the spread of ideas and viruses 
in social networks to the number of driver nodes needed to 
control a network. 
Taken together, Image 2.17 illustrates that the quantities 
we introduced in this chapter can help us diagnose several 
key properties of real networks. The purpose of the coming 
chapters is to study systematically these network charac­
teristics, understanding what they tell us about the behav­
ior of a complex system.
42 | NETWORK SCIENCE


WEIGHTED NETWORK: a network whose links have a predefined weight, 
strength or fow parameter. The elements of the adjacency matrix are Aij = 
0 if i and j are not connected, or Aij = wij if there is a link with weight wij 
between them. For unweighted (binary) networks, the adjacency matrix 
only indicates the presence (Aij = 1) or the absence (Aij = 0) of a link be­
tween two nodes. Examples: Mobile phone calls, email network.
SELF-INTERACTIONS: in many networks nodes do not interact with 
themselves, so the diagonal elements of adjacency matrix are zero, Aii = 0,   
i =1,...,N. In some systems self-interactions are allowed; in such networks, 
representing the fact that node i has a self-interaction. Examples: WWW, 
protein interactions. 
MULTIGRAPH: in a multigraph nodes are permitted to have multiple links 
(or parallel links) between them. Hence Aii  can have any positive integer.
COMPLETE GRAPH: in a complete graph all nodes are connected to each 
other; no self-connections.
Image 2.16
Graphology.
In network science we encounter many networks distinguished by some 
elementary property of the underlying graph. Here we summarize the 
most commonly encountered elementary network types, together with 
their basic properties, and an illustrative list of real systems that share the 
particular property. Note that in many real network we need to combine 
several of these elementary network characteristics. For example the 
WWW is a directed multi-graph with self-interactions. The mobile call 
network is directed and weighted, without self-loops.
DIRECTED NETWORK: a network whose links have selected directions. 
Examples: WWW, mobile phone calls, citation network.
UNDIRECTED NETWORK: a network whose links do not have a predefined 
direction. Examples: Internet, power grid, science collaboration networks, 
protein interactions.
CASE STUDY AND SUMMARY | 43


Image 2.16
Characterizing a real network.
The protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of yeast, a network 
frequently studied not only by biologists, but also by network scien­
tists. The nodes of the network are proteins and links correspond to 
experimentally documented protein-protein binding interactions. 
The figure indicates that the network, consisting of N=2,018 nodes 
and L=2,930 links, has a giant component that connects 81% of 
the proteins, several smaller components, and numerous isolated 
proteins that do not interact with any other node.
The degree distribution, pk, of the PPI network, providing the 
probability that a randomly chosen node has degree k. As Nk= Npk, 
the degree distribution provides the number of nodes with degree 
k. The degree distribution indicates that proteins of widely different 
degrees coexist in the PPI: most nodes have only a few links, a 
few, however, have dozens of links, representing the hubs of the 
network.
The distance distribution, pd for the PPI network, providing the 
probability that two randomly chosen nodes have a distance d be­
tween them (shortest path). The dotted line shows the average path 
length, which is ‹d› =5.61.
The  dependence of the average clustering coefficient on the node’s 
degree, k. The C(k) function is measured by averaging over the local 
clustering coefficient of all nodes with the same degree k.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
44 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 12
ADVANCED TOPICS: GLOBAL CLUSTERING COEFFICIENT
In the network literature one often encounters the global 
clustering coefficient, which measures the total number of 
closed triangles in a network. Indeed, Li in Eq. (19) is the 
number of triangles that node i participates in, as each link 
between two neighbors of node i closes a triangle (Image 
2.15). Hence the degree of a network’s global clustering is 
captured by the global clustering coefficient, deﬁned as 
	
	
￼
	
	
		
(21)
where a connected triplet consists of three nodes that are 
connected by two (open triplet) or three (closed triplet) 
undirected links. For example, an A, B, C triangle is made 
of three triples, ABC, BCA and CAB. In contrast a chain of 
connected nodes A, B, C, in which B connects to A and C 
but A does not link to C forms a single open triplet. The 
factor of three in the denominator of Eq. (21) is due to the 
fact that each triangle is counted tree times in the triple 
count. The roots of the global clustering coefficient go back 
to the social network literature of the 1940s [10,11], hence 
C is often called the number of transitive triplets.
Note that the average clustering coefficient <C> defined in 
(20) and the global clustering coefficient defined in (21) 
are not equivalent. 
Indeed, take a network that is a double star consisting of 
N nodes, where nodes 1 and 2 are joined to each other and 
to all other vertices, and there are no other links. Then the 
local clustering coefficient Ci is 1 for i ≥ 3 and 2/(N − 1) 
for i = 1, 2. It follows that the average clustering coefficient 
of the network is <C> = 1−O(1), while the global cluster­
ing coefficient gives C ~ 2/N. In less extreme networks the 
definitions will give more comparable values, but they will 
still differ from each other [13]. For example, in Image 2.15 
we have <C> = 0.31 while C = 0.375 .
=
×
C
NumberOfTriangles
NumberOfConnectedTriples
3
ADVANCED TOPICS | 45


SECTION 13
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1] A.-L. Barabási and R. Albert. Emergence of scaling in 
random networks. Science, 286(5439):509–512, 1999. 
[2] G. Gilder. Metcalfe’s law and legacy. Forbes ASAP, 1993. 
[3] B. Briscoe, A. Odlyzko, and B. Tilly. Metcalfe’s law is 
wrong. IEEE Spectrum, 43(7):34–39, 2006. 
[4] K.-I. Goh, M. E. Cusick, D. Valle, B. Childs, M. Vidal, 
and A.-L. Barabási. The human disease network. Proceed­
ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(21):8685–
8690, 2007. 
[5] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz. Collective dynamics of 
‘small-world’ networks. Nature, 393(6684):440–442, 1998. 
[6] A. Barrat, M. Barthélemy, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. 
Vespignani. The architecture of complex weighted networks. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 101(11):3747–3752, 2004. 
[7] J. P. Onnela, J. Saramäki, J. Kertész, and K. Kaski. Inten­
sity and coherence of motifs in weighted complex networks. 
Phys. Rev. E, 71:065103, 2005. 
[8] B. Zhang and S. Horvath. A general framework for 
weighted gene coexpression network analysis. Statistical Ap­
plications in Genetics and Molecular Biology, 4:17, 2005. 
[9] P. Holme, S. M. Park, J. B. Kim, and C. R. Edling. Ko­
rean university life in a network perspective: Dynamics of a 
large affiliation network. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics 
and its Applications, 373(0):821–830, 2007. 
[10] R. D. Luce and A. D. Perry. A method of matrix analysis 
of group structure. Psychometrika, 14:95–116, 1949. 
[11] S. Wasserman and K Faust. Social Network Analysis: 
Methods and Applications. Cambridge University Press, 
1994. 
[12] Y.-Y. Ahn, S. E. Ahnert, J. P. Bagrow, A.-L. Barabási, 
Flavor network and the principles of food pairing, Scientific 
Reports 196, 2011.
[13] B. Bollobás and O. M. Riordan. Mathematical re­
sults on scale-free random graphs, in Stefan Bornholdt, 
Hans Georg Schuster, Handbook of Graphs and Networks: 
From the Genome to the Internet, (2003 Wiley-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA).
[14] K.-I. Goh, M. E. Cusick, D. Valle, B. Childs, M. Vidal, 
and A.-L. Barabási, The human disease network, Proceed­
ings of the National Academy of Sciences 104:21, 8685 
(2007). 
46 | NETWORK SCIENCE


CHAPTER 3
Introduction
The random network model
The number of links is variable
Degree distribution
Real networks do no not have a 
Poisson degree distribution
The evolution of a random          
network
Real networks are supercritical
The small world property
Clustering coefficient
Real networks are not random
Advanced Topics 3.A:                            
Deriving the Poisson degree dis­
tribution
Advanced Topics 3.B:                            
The maximum and the minimum 
degree
Advanced Topics 3.C:                             
Giant component
Advanced Topics 3.D:                       
Component sizes
Advanced Topics 3.E:                             
Supercritical regime
Advanced Topics 3.F:                       
Phase transitions
Advanced Topics 3.G:                         
Correction to small worlds
Bibliography
RANDOM NETWORKS


SECTION 1
INTRODUCTION
Imagine organizing a party for a hundred guests who ini­
tially do not know each other [1]. Offer them wine and 
cheese and you will soon have dozens of chatting groups 
of two to three. Now mention to Mary, one of your guests, 
that the red wine in the unlabeled dark green bottles is a 
rare vintage, much better than the one with the fancy red 
label. If she shares this information only with her acquain­
tances, you know that your expensive wine is safe, because 
she only had time to meet a few others in the room. How­
ever, the guests will continue to mingle, creating subtle 
paths between individuals that may still be strangers to 
each other. For example, while John has not yet met Mary, 
they have both met Mike, so now there is an invisible path 
from John to Mary through Mike.  As time goes on, the 
guests will be increasingly interwoven by such intangible 
links. With that the secret of the unlabeled bottle will be 
pass from Mary to Mike and from Mike to John, slowly 
escaping into a rapidly expanding group. 
48 | NETWORK SCIENCE
Image 3.1
From a cocktail party to random networks.
The emergence of an acquaintance network through random encounters at a cocktail party.
To be sure, when all guests had gotten to know each other, 
everyone would be pouring the superior wine. But if each 
encounter took only ten minutes, meeting all ninety-nine 
others would take about sixteen hours. Thus, you could 
reasonably hope that a few drops of the better wine would 
be left for you to enjoy once the party is over.
Yet, you will be wrong.  The purpose of this chapter is to 
show you why. We will see that the party maps into a clas­
sic model in network science called the random network 
model.  And random network theory tells us that we do not 
have to wait until all individuals get to know each other 
for our expensive wine to be in danger. Rather, soon af­
ter each person meets at least one other guest, an invisible 
network will form that will allow the information to reach 
most guests. Hence in no time everyone will be drinking 
the better wine.


SECTION 2
THE RANDOM NETWORK MODEL
An important goal of network science is to build models 
that accurately reproduce the properties of real networks 
observed in real systems. Most networks we encounter in 
nature do not have the comforting regularity of a crystal 
lattice or the predictable radial architecture of a spider 
web. Rather, at first inspection most real networks look 
as if they were spun randomly. Random network theory 
embraces this apparent randomness by constructing net­
works that are truly random. 
From a modeling perspective a network is a relatively sim­
ple object, consisting of only nodes and links. The real 
challenge, however, is to place the links between the nodes 
in a way to reproduce the complexity and apparent ran­
domness of real systems. In this context the philosophy be­
hind a random network is simple:  it assumes that this goal 
is best achieved by placing the links randomly between the 
nodes. With that we arrive to the definition of a random 
network:
A random network consists of N labeled nodes where each 
node pair is connected with the same probability p.
Box 3.1
Two definitions of random networks.
There are two equivalent ways of defining a random network:
• 
G(N,L) model: N labeled nodes are connected with L random­
ly placed links. Erdős and Rényi (Erdős & Rényi, 1959) used 
this definition in their string of articles on random networks.
• 
G(N,p) model: Each pair of N labeled nodes is connected with 
probability p, a model introduced by Gilbert (Gilbert, 1959).
Hence the G(N,p) model fixes the probability p that two nodes are 
connected and the G(N,L) model fixes the total number of links L. 
While in the G(N,L) model the average degree of a node is simply 
‹k› = 2L / N, other network characteristics are easier to calculate in 
the G(N, p) model. Throughout this book we will explore the G(N,p) 
model, not only for the ease that it allows us to calculate key net­
work characteristics, but also because its construction is closer to 
the way real systems develop. Indeed, in real networks the number 
of links is rarely fixed, but we can instead determine the probability 
that two nodes link to each other.
To construct a random network, denoted with G(N, p) 
(Box 3.1):  
1.	 Start with N isolated nodes. 
2.	 Select a node pair, and generate a random number be­
tween 0 and 1. If the random number exceeds p, con­
nect the selected node pair with a link, otherwise leave 
them disconnected.
3.	 Repeat step (2) for each of the N(N-1)/2 node pairs. 
The network obtained through this procedure is called a 
random graph or a random network. Two mathematicians, 
Pál Erdős and Alfréd Rényi, have played an important role 
in understanding the properties of random networks. In 
their honor a random network is often called the Erdős-
Rényi network (Box 3.2).
Box 3.2
A brief history of random networks.
Anatol Rapoport (1911-2007), a Russian immigrant to the United 
States, was the first to explore the properties of a random 
network. Trained as a pianist, Rapoport’s interests turned to 
mathematics after realizing that a successful career as a concert 
pianist would require a wealthy patron. He became interested 
in mathematical biology at a time when mathematicians and 
biologists hardly spoke to each other. In a paper written with Ray 
Solomonoff in 1951 [28], Rapoport demonstrated that if we in­
crease the average degree of a network, we will observe an abrupt 
transition from a collection of disconnected nodes to a state in 
which the graph contains a giant component. Despite its pioneer­
ing ideas, Rapoport’s paper remains relatively unknown.
The study of random networks reached prominence thanks to the 
fundamental work of Pál Erdős and Alfréd Rényi. In a sequence 
of eight papers published between 1959 and 1968 [8-15], they 
merged probability theory and combinatorics with graph theory, 
establishing random graph theory, a new branch of mathematics 
[5]. 
The random network model was independently introduced by 
Gilbert [18] the same year Erdős and Rényi published their first 
paper on the subject. Yet, the impact of Erdős and Rényi’s work is 
so overwhelming that they are rightly considered the fathers of 
random networks. 
THE RANDOM NETWORK MODEL | 49


Image 3.2a
Pál Erdős (1913-1996)
Hungarian mathematician known for both his eccentricity and exceptional 
scientific output, having published more papers than any other mathema­
tician in the history of mathematics. His productivity had its roots in his 
fondness for collaboration: he co-authored papers with over five hundred 
mathematicians, inspiring the concept of Erdős number. His legendarily 
personality and profound professional impact has inspired two biographies 
[19, 27] and a documentary [7].
Image 3.2b
Alfréd Rényi (1921-1970)
Hungarian mathematician with fundamental contributions to combina­
torics, graph theory, and number theory. His impact goes beyond mathe­
matics: the Rényi entropy is widely used in chaos theory and the random 
network model he co-developed is at the heart of network science. He is 
remembered through the hotbed of Hungarian mathematics, the Alfréd 
Rényi Institute of Mathematics in Budapest. He once said, “A mathemati­
cian is a device for turning coffee into theorems”, a quote often attributed 
to Erdős.
50 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 3
THE NUMBER OF LINKS IS VARIABLE
Each random network we generate with the same param­
eters N, p will look slightly different (Image 3.3). Not only 
the detailed wiring diagram will vary between realizations, 
but so will the number of links L. It is useful, therefore, to 
determine how many links we expect for a particular reali­
zation of a random network with fixed N and p.
The probability that a random network has exactly L links 
is the product of three terms:
1.	 The probability that L of the attempts to connect the 
N(N-1)/2 pairs of nodes have resulted in a link, which 
is p L.
2.	 The probability that the remaining N(N-1)/2 - L  at­
tempts have not resulted in a link, which is (1-p)N(N-1)/2-L
3.	 A combinational factor,         counting the number of 
different ways we can place L links among N(N-1)/2 
node pairs.
Hence the probability that a particular realization of a ran­
dom graph has exactly L links is
	
	
	
	
	
	
(1)
As Eq. (1) is a binomial distribution (Box 3.3), the expected 
number of links in a random graph can be calculated as
	
	
	
	
	
	
(2)
Hence ‹L› is the product of the probability p that two nodes 
are connected and the number of pairs we attempt to con­
nect, which is Lmax = N(N - 1)/2  (Chapter 2).
Using Eq. (2) we obtain the average degree of a random 
network as
 	
	
	
     
￼
	
	
		
   	
	
	
	
	
	
	
(3)
Hence ‹k› is the product of the probability p that two nodes 
are connected and (N-1), representing the maximum 
number of links a node can have in a network of size N.
In summary the number of links in a random network is 
not fixed, but varies between realizations. Its expected val­
ue is determined by N and p. If we increase p from p = 0 to 
p = 1 the random network becomes denser and the average 
number of links increase linearly from ‹L› = 0  to Lmax and 
the average degree of a node increases from ‹k› = 0  to 
‹k› = N-1.
N
L
2












p
N
L
p
p
= 
2
(1
)
.
L
L
N N
L
(
1)
2












−
−−
L
Lp
p N N
 
(
1)
2
.
L
N N
L
0
(
1)
2∑
〈〉=
=
−
=
−
k
L
N
p N
 
2
(
1).
〈〉=
〈〉=
−
Image 3.3
Random networks are truly random.
Top row: Three realizations of a random network generated with the same 
parameters N = 12 and p =1/6. Despite the identical parameters, the net­
works not only look different, but they differ in the number of links they 
have (L  = 8, 10, 7) and in the degree of the individual nodes. 
Bottom row: Three realizations of a random network with N = 100 and 
p  = 1/6.
THE NUMBER OF LINKS IS VARIABLE | 51


Box 3.3
Binomial distribution:  Mean and variance.
If we toss a fair coin N times, tails and heads should occur with 
the same probability p = 1/2. The binomial distribution provides 
the probability px that we obtain exactly x heads in a sequence of 
N throws. In general, the binomial distribution describes the num­
ber of successes in N independent experiments with two possible 
outcomes, in which the probability of one outcome is p, and of the 
other is 1-p.
The binomial distribution has the form 
	
	
	￼
The mean of the distribution (first moment) is
	
	
	
￼
	
		
(4)	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Its second moment is
	
	
	
	
	
	
(5)
providing its standard deviation as
	
	
	
	
	
	
(6)
x
xp
Np.
x
N
x
0∑
〈〉=
=
=
x
x p
p
p N
p N
(1
)
,
x
N
x
2
2
0
2
2
∑
〈
〉=
=
−
+
=
x
x
p
p N
[ (1
) ] .
x
2
2
1
2
1
2
σ
(
)
= 〈
〉−〈〉
=
−
p
N
x
p
p
(1
)
.
x
x
N x
= 



−
−
52 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 4
DEGREE DISTRIBUTION
As Image 3.3 illustrates, in a given realization of a random 
network some nodes are lucky, gaining numerous links, 
while others have only a few or no links. These differenc­
es are captured by the degree distribution pk providing the 
probablity that a randomly chosen node has degree k. 
In a random network the probability that node i has exactly 
k links is the product of three terms [5]:
• 
The probability that k of its links are present, or pk.
• 
The probability that the remaining (N - 1 - k) links are 
missing, or (1-p)N-1-k.
• 
The number of ways we can select k links from N - 1 
potential links a node can have, or       ￼
 .
Hence the degree distribution of a random network fol­
lows the binomial distribution
	
	
	
	
	
	
(7)
The shape of this distribution depends on the system size 
N and the probability p (Image 3.4). Using the properties 
of the binomial distribution (Box 3.3), from the degree dis­
tribution (7) we can calculate the network’s average degree 
‹k›, recovering Eq. (3). We can also determine the second 
moment ‹k2› and the variance σk of the degree distribution 
(Image 3.4), quantities that will play an important role lat­
er.
Most real networks are sparse, hence ‹k› « N (Table 3.1, Im­
age 3.4b). In this limit the degree distribution (7) is well 
approximated by the Poisson distribution (Advanced Top­
ics 3. A)
	
	
	
	
      ￼
     	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
(8)
which is often called, together with (7), the degree distri­
bution of a random network.
The binomial and the Poisson distribution describe the 
N
k
1
−




p
N
k
p
p
 
1
(1
)
.
k
k
N
k
1
=
−




−
−−
same quantity, hence they have several common properties 
(Image 3.4a):
• 
Both distributions have a peak around ‹k›. If we keep N 
constant and increase p, the network becomes denser, 
increasing ‹k› and moving the peak to the right. 
• 
The width of the distribution (dispersion) is also con­
trolled by p or ‹k›. The denser the network, the wider is 
the distribution, hence the larger are the differences in 
the degrees.
 
As we use the Poisson form in Eq. (8), we need to keep in 
mind that:
• 
The exact result for the degree distribution is the bi­
nomial form in Eq. (7), thus Eq. (8) represents only an 
approximation to (7) valid in the k « N limit. For most 
networks of practical importance this condition is eas­
ily satisfied.
• 
The advantage of the Poisson form is that key network 
characteristics, like ‹k›, ‹k2› and σk , have a much sim­
pler form (Image 3.4a), depending on a single param­
eter, ‹k›.
• 
The Poisson distribution in Eq. (8) does not explicit­
ly depend on the number of nodes N . Therefore, Eq. 
(8) predicts that the degree distributions of networks 
of different sizes but the same average degree ‹k› are 
indistinguishable from each other (Image 3.4b).
Despite the fact that the Poisson distribution is only an 
approximation to the degree distribution of a random net­
work, thanks to its analytical simplicity, it is the preferred 
form for pk. Hence throughout this book, unless noted oth­
erwise, we will refer to the Poisson form in Eq. (8) as the 
degree distribution of a random network.
p
e
k
k! ,
k
k
k
=
〈〉
−〈〉
DEGREE DISTRIBUTION | 53


Image 3.4a
Anatomy of a binomial and a Poisson degree distribution.
The exact form of the degree distribution of a random network is the 
binomial distribution (left). For N  » ‹k›, the binomial can be well approx­
imated by a Poisson distribution (right). As both distributions describe 
the same quantity, they have the same properties, which are expressed in 
terms of different parameters: the binomial distribution uses p and N as 
its fundamental parameters, while the Poisson distribution has only one 
parameter, ‹k›.
Image 3.4b
Degree distribution is independent of the network size.
The degree distribution of a random network with average degree ‹k› = 50 
and sizes N = 102 , 103 , 104. For N = 102 the degree distribution deviates 
significantly from the Poisson prediction (8), as the condition for the 
Poisson approximation, N » ‹k›, is not satisfied. Hence for small networks 
one needs to use the exact binomial form of Eq. (7) (dotted line). For N = 
103 and larger networks the degree distribution becomes indistinguishable 
from the Poisson prediction, (8), shown as a continuous line, illustrating 
that for large N the degree distribution is independent of the network size. 
In the figure we averaged over 1,000 independently generated random 
networks to decrease the noise in the degree distribution.
54 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 5
REAL NETWORKS DO NO NOT HAVE 
A POISSON DEGREE DISTRIBUTION
The degree of a node in a random network can vary be­
tween 0 and N-1, raising an important question: How big 
are the differences between the node degrees in a particular 
realization of a random network? That is, can highly con­
nected nodes, or hubs, coexist with small degree nodes? 
We address answer these questions by estimating the size 
of the largest and the smallest node in a random network. 
Let us assume that the world’s social network is described 
by the random network model. This may not be as far 
fetched hypothesis as it first sounds: there is significant 
randomness in whom we meet and whom we choose to 
become acquainted with. Sociologists estimate that a typ­
ical person knows about 1,000 individuals on a first name 
basis, suggesting that ‹k›≃1,000. Using the results obtained 
so far about random networks, we arrive to a number of 
surprising conclusions about a random society (see Ad­
vanced Topics 3.B):
• 
The most connected individual (the largest degree 
node) in a random society is expected to have degree 
kmax = 1,185.
• 
The least connected individual is expected to have de­
gree kmin = 816.
• 
The dispersion of a random network is σk=‹k›1/2 , which 
for ‹k›=1,000 is σk = 31.62. This means that the number 
of friends of a typical individual should be mainly in 
the ‹k› ± σk range, or between 970 and 1,030, a rather 
narrow range.
In other words, in a random society everyone would have 
a comparable number of friends.  We would lack outliers, 
or highly popular individuals, and no one would be left be­
hind, having only a few friends. This calculation illustrates 
that in a large random network the degree of most nodes is in 
the narrow vicinity of  ‹k› (Box 3.4).  
This prediction blatantly conflicts with reality. Indeed, 
there is extensive evidence of individuals who have con­
siderably more than 1,018 acquaintances. For example, US 
president Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s appointment book 
had about 22,000 names in it, individuals he met person­
ally [17, 26]. Similarly, a study of the social network behind 
Facebook has documented numerous individuals with 
5,000 Facebook friends, the maximum allowed by the so­
cial networking platform [4]. The reason behind these sys­
tematic discrepancies can be understood by comparing the 
degree distribution of real and random networks. 
In Image 3.5 we show the degree distribution of three real 
networks, together with the corresponding Poisson fits. 
The figure documents considerable differences between 
the random network predictions and the real data:
• 
The Poisson form significantly underestimates the 
number of high degree nodes. For example, according 
to the random network model the maximum degree 
for the Internet is expected to be around 20, while the 
data indicates the existence of nodes with degrees close 
to 103.
REAL NETWORKS DO NO NOT HAVE  A POISSON DEGREE DISTRIBUTION | 55
Box 3.4
Why hubs are absent in random network.
To understand why hubs are absent in random networks, we turn to 
the degree distribution (8). We first realize that the 1/k! term in (8) 
significantly decreases the chances of observing large degree nodes. 
Indeed, the Stirling approximation
allows us rewrite Eq. (8) as
	
	
	
	
	
	
(9)
For degrees k > e ‹k› the term in the parenthesis is smaller than one, 
hence for large k both k-dependent terms in (9), i.e. 1/√k and 
(e‹k› /k)k decrease rapidly with increasing k. Overall Eq. (9) predicts 
that in a random network the chance of observing a hub decreases 
faster than exponentially.
(
)
p
e
k
e k
k
2
.
k
k
k
π
=
〈〉
−〈〉

k
k
k
e
!
2π










Image 3.5
Degree distribution of real networks.
The degree distribution of the Internet, science collaboration network, and the protein interaction network of yeast (Table 2.1). The dashed line corre­
sponds to the Poisson prediction, obtained by measuring ‹k› for the real network and then plotting Eq. (8). The significant deviation between the data and 
the Poisson fit indicates that the random network model underestimates the size and the frequency of highly connected nodes, or hubs. 
56 | NETWORK SCIENCE
• 
The spread in the degrees of real networks is much 
wider than expected in a random network. This differ­
ence is captured by the dispersion σ k (Image 3.4a). For 
example, if the Internet were to be random, we would 
expect σ k = 2.52, while the measurements indicate      
         σ internet = 14.14, significantly higher than predicted.
These differences are not limited to the networks shown 
in Image 3.5, but all networks listed in Table 2.1 share this 
property. Hence the comparison with the real data indi­
cates that the random network model does not capture the 
degree distribution of real networks. While in a random 
network most nodes have comparable degrees, forbidding 
hubs, in real networks we observe a significant number of 
highly connected nodes and large differences in node de­
grees. We will resolve these differences in Chapter 4.


SECTION 6
THE EVOLUTION OF A RANDOM NETWORK
The cocktail party we encountered at the beginning of the 
chapter captures a dynamical process: starting with N iso­
lated nodes, the links are added gradually through random 
encounters between the guests. Within the random net­
work model this corresponds to a gradual increase of p, 
with striking consequences on the network topology (Mov­
ie 3.1). To quantify this process, we first inspect how the 
size NG of the giant component, which is the largest cluster 
within the network, varies with ‹k›. The two extreme cases 
are easy to understand:
• 
For p = 0 we have ‹k› = 0, hence we observe only isolat­
ed nodes. Therefore NG = 1  and  NG  / N g0 for large N.
• 
For p = 1 we have ‹k›= N-1, hence the network is a com­
plete graph and all nodes belong to a single cluster. 
Therefore NG = N and NG / N = 1.
One would expect that the giant component will grow 
gradually from NG = 1 to NG = N if we increase ‹k› from 0 
to N-1. Yet, as Image 3.6a indicates, this is not the case: 
NG / N remains zero for small ‹k›, indicating the lack of 
a giant component for a range of ‹k› values. Once ‹k› ex­
ceeds a critical value, NG  / N increases rapidly, signaling 
the emergence of a giant component. Erdős and Rényi in 
their classical 1959 paper predicted that the condition for 
the emergence of the giant component is 
	
	
	
	
	
	
  (10)
	
	
	
	
	
 
In other words, we have a giant component if and only if 
when each node has on average one link (Advanced Topics 
3.C). 
The fact that at least one link per node is necessary for a gi­
ant component is not unexpected. Indeed, for a giant com­
ponent to exist, each of its nodes must be linked to at least 
one other node. It is somewhat counterintuitive, however 
that one link is sufficient for its emergence.
If we wish to express Eq. (10) in terms of p, using Eq. (3) 
we obtain 
	
	
	
	
     
￼
		
                	
  	
	
	
	
	
	
(11)
indicating that the larger a network, the smaller p is suffi­
cient  for the giant component.  
The emergence of the giant component is only one of the 
important transitions displayed by a random network. 
Changes in ‹k› allow us to distinguish four topologically 
distinct regimes (Image 3.6), each with its unique charac­
teristics:
(a) Subcritical regime: 0 < ‹k› < 1, (p < ￼
). 
For ‹k› = 0 the network consists of N isolated nodes. In­
creasing ‹k› is equivalent with adding N‹k› = pN(N-1)/2 
links to the network.  Yet, given the small number of links 
in the network in this regime, these links will mainly form 
clusters of size two (Image 3.6b).  Upon increasing ‹k› fur­
ther, some of the new links will join these pairs, forming 
tiny clusters. While we can designate at any moment the 
largest such cluster to be the giant component, in this re­
gime the relative size of the largest cluster, NG / N, remains 
zero. The reason is that for ‹k› < 1 the largest cluster is a tree 
Movie 3.1
Evolution of a random graph.
Changes in the structure of a random graph with increasing p, illustrating 
the absence of a giant component for small p and its sudden emergence 
once p exceeds a critical value.
=
k
1.
p
N
N
1
1
1 ,
c =
−≈
N
1
THE EVOLUTION OF A RANDOM NETWORK | 57


with size NG ~ lnN. Therefore NG / N ≃ lnN / Ng0 in the 
Ng∞ limit, indicating that the largest component is tiny 
compared to the size of the network. 
In summary, in the subcritical regime the network con­
sists of numerous tiny components, whose size follows an 
exponential distribution. Hence these components have 
comparable sizes, lacking a clear winner that we could 
designate as a giant component (Advanced Topics 3.D).
(b) Critical Point: ‹k› = 1, (p = ￼
). 
The critical point separates the regime where there is not 
yet a  giant component (‹k› < 1) from the regime where 
there is one (‹k› > 1).  While it signals the emergence of 
the giant component, the relative size of the largest com­
ponent in this point is still zero (Image 3.6c). Indeed, the 
calculations indicate that the size of the largest component 
is NG ~ N2/3, so its relative size decreases as NG / N~ N -1/3, in­
dicating that NG is still tiny compared to the network’s size. 
In absolute terms there is a significant increase in the size 
of the largest component at ‹k› = 1. For example, for a ran­
dom network of N = 7 ×109 nodes, the size of the globe’s 
social network, for ‹k› < 1 the largest cluster is of the order 
of NG ≃ lnN = ln (7 ×109)≃ 22.7. In contrast at ‹k› = 1 we ex­
pect NG ~ N2/3 = (7 ×109)2/3 ≃ 3 ×106, a jump of about five 
orders of magnitude. Yet, both in the subcritical regime (‹k› 
< 1) and at the critical point (‹k› = 1) the largest component 
contains a vanishing fraction of the total number of nodes in 
the network.
Therefore most nodes are located in numerous small com­
ponents, whose size distribution follows Eq. (36), a pow­
er law form indicating that components of rather differ­
ent sizes coexist. These numerous small components are 
mainly trees, while the giant component may  contain 
loops. Note that many properties of the network at the crit­
ical point resemble the properties of a physical system un­
dergoing a phase transition (Advanced Topics 3.F). 
(c) Supercritical regime: ‹k› > 1, (p > ￼
).
This regime has the most relevance to real systems, as for 
the first time we have a giant component that looks like a 
network. In the vicinity of the critical point the size of the 
giant component varies as
                               ￼
                                 	
	
(12)
or
                               ￼
                                 	
	
(13)
where pc  is given by Eq. (11). In other words, the giant 
component contains a finite fraction of all nodes in the net­
work. The further we move from the critical point, a larger 
fraction of nodes will belong to it. Note that Eq. (12) is val­
id only in the vicinity of ‹k› = 1, and for large ‹k› the depen­
dence between NG  and ‹k› is nonlinear (Image 3.6d).  
In the supercritical regime there are still numerous iso­
lated components that coexist with the giant component, 
their size distribution being given by Eq. (35). These small 
￿k￿
Fully	  connected	  regime	  
• 
Single	  giant	  component.	  	  
• 
No	  isolated	  nodes	  or	  clusters.	  
• 
Size	  of	  the	  giant	  component:	  
	  
• 
GC	  has	  many	  loops.	  
NG/N
Subcri2cal	  regime	  
• 
No	  giant	  component.	  
• 
Cluster	  size	  distribu<on:	  
	  
• 
The	  size	  of	  the	  largest	  cluster:	  
	  
• 
The	  clusters	  are	  trees.	  
P(s) ∼e−αs
NG ∼ln N
Cri2cal	  point	  
• 
No	  giant	  component.	  
• 
Cluster	  size	  distribu<on:	  
	  
• 
Size	  of	  the	  largest	  cluster:	  
	  
• 
The	  clusters	  may	  contain	  loops.	  
P(s) ∼s−3/2
NG ∼N 2/3
Supercri2cal	  regime	  
• 
Single	  giant	  component.	  
• 
Cluster	  size	  distribu<on:	  
• 
Size	  of	  the	  giant	  component:	  
	  
• 
The	  small	  clusters	  are	  trees.	  
• 
GC	  has	  loops.	  
P(s) ∼e−αs
NG ∼(p −pc)N
NG = N
￿k￿< 1
￿k￿= 1
￿k￿> 1
￿k￿≥ln N
Image 3.6
Evolution of a random network.
(a) The relative size of the giant component in function of the average 
degree ‹k› in the Erdős-Rényi model. 
(b)-(e) The main network characteristics in the four regimes that charac­
terize a random network. 
N
1
N
1
N
N
k
/
~
1,
G
〈〉−
N
p
p N
~ (
) ,
G
c
−
58 | NETWORK SCIENCE
 a)
b)
c)
d)
e)


components are trees, while the giant component contains 
numerous loops and cycles.  The supercritical regime lasts 
until all nodes are absorbed by the giant component.
(d) Connected regime: ‹k› ≥ lnN, (p ≥    ￼
).
For sufficiently large p the giant component will absorb 
all nodes and components, hence NG≃N. In the absence 
of isolated nodes the network becomes connected. The av­
erage degree at which this happens depends on N as (Ad­
vanced Topic 3.E)
                                      ￼
                               	 	
   (14)
Note that when we enter the connected regime the net­
work is still relatively sparse, as lnN / N q 0 for large N. 
The network turns into a complete graph only at ‹k› = N - 1.
In summary, the emergence of a network within the ran­
dom network model is not a smooth process: the isolated 
nodes and tiny components observed for small ‹k› orga­
nize themselves into a giant component rather sudden­
ly,  through a process called phase transition (Advanced 
Topics 3.F). Along the way we encounter four topologi­
cally distinct regimes (Image 3.6). The discussion offered 
above follows an empirical perspective, fruitful if we wish 
to compare the observed networks to real systems.  A dif­
ferent prospective, leading to it own rich behavior, is dis­
cussed in the mathematical literature (Box 3.5).
k
N
~ ln .
〈〉
Box 3.5
Network evolution in graph theory.
In the random graph literature it is often assumed that the con­
nection probability p(N) scales as Nz, where z is a tunable param­
eter between -∞ and 0. The greatest discovery of Erdős and Rényi 
was that as we vary z, key properties of random graphs appear 
quite suddenly. To be precise, a graph has a given property Q if the 
probability of having Q approaches 1 as N g ∞. That is, for a given 
probability either almost every graph has the property Q or, almost 
no graph has it. For example, for z less than -3/2 almost all graphs 
contain only isolated nodes and edges. 
Image 3.7
Evolution of random graph.
The threshold probabilities at which different subgraphs appear 
in a random graph, as defined by exponent z in the p(N) ~ Nz 
relationship. For z < -3/2 the graph consists of isolated nodes 
and edges. When z passes -3/2 trees of order 3 appear, while at 
z = -4/3 trees of order 4 appear. At z = 1 trees of all orders are 
present, together with cycles of all orders. Complete subgraphs 
of order 4 appear at z =-2/3, and as z increases further, complete 
subgraphs of larger and larger order emerge.
THE EVOLUTION OF A RANDOM NETWORK | 59
N
N
ln


SECTION 7
REAL NETWORKS ARE SUPERCRITICAL
Two predictions of random network theory are of special 
importance for real networks:  
1.	 Once the average degree exceeds ‹k› = 1, a giant com­
ponent emerges that contains a finite fraction of all 
nodes. Hence only for ‹k› > 1 the nodes organize them­
selves into a recognizable network. 
2.	 For ‹k› > lnN all components are absorbed by the giant 
component, resulting in a single connected network.
But, do real networks satisfy the criteria for the existence 
of a giant component, i.e. ‹k› › 1? And will this giant com­
ponent contain all nodes, i.e. is ‹k› › lnN , or do we expect 
some nodes and components to remain disconnected? 
These questions can be answered by comparing the mea­
sured ‹k› with the theoretical thresholds uncovered above. 
The measurements indicate that real networks extrava­
gantly exceed the ‹k› = 1 threshold. Indeed, sociologists es­
timate that an average person has around 1,000 acquain­
tances; a typical neuron is connected to dozens of other 
neurons, some to thousands; in our cells, each molecule 
takes part in several chemical reactions, some, like water, 
in hundreds. This conclusion is supported by Table 3.1, 
listing the average degree of several undirected networks, 
in each case finding ‹k› > 1. Hence the average degree of 
real networks is well beyond the ‹k› = 1 threshold, implying 
that they all have a giant component.
Let us now inspect if we have single component (if ‹k› > 
lnN), or we expect the network to be fragmented into 
multiple components (if ‹k› < lnN ). For social networks 
this would mean that ‹k› ≥ ln(7 ×109) ≃ 22.7. That is, if the 
average individual has more than two dozens acquain­
tances, then a random society would have a single com­
ponent, leaving no node disconnected. With ‹k› ≃ 1,000 
this is clearly satisfied. Yet, according to Table 3.1 most real 
networks do not satisfy this criteria, indicating that they 
should consist of several disconnected components. This 
is a disconcerting prediction for the Internet, as it suggests 
that we should have routers that, being disconnected from 
the giant component, are unable to communicate with 
other routers. This prediction is at odd with reality, as these 
routers would be of little utility. 
Table 3.1
Are real networks connected?
The number of nodes N and links L for several undirected networks, 
together with ‹k› and lnN.  A giant component is expected for ‹k› > 1 and 
all nodes should join the giant component for ‹k›  ≥ lnN.  While for all 
networks ‹k› > 1, for most ‹k› is under the lnN threshold.
Image 3.8
Most real networks are supercritical.
The four regimes predicted by random network theory, marking with a 
cross the location of several real networks of Table 3.1. The diagram indi­
cates that most networks are in the supercritical regime, hence they are 
expected to be broken into numerous isolated components. Only the actor 
network is in the connected regime, meaning that all nodes are expected 
to be part of a single giant component. Note that while the boundary be­
tween the subcritical and the supercritical regime is always at ‹k› = 1, the 
boundary between the supercritical and the connected regimes is at lnN, 
hence varies from system to system. 
Network  
 
  N         L 
 <k>   ln N
Internet
Power Grid
Science Collaboration
Actor Network
Yeast Protein Interactions
192,244
4,941
23,133
212,250
2,018
609,066
6,594
186,936
3,054,278
2,930
6.34
2.67
8.08
28.78
2.90
12.17
8.51
10.04
12.27
7.61
Fully Connected
Subcritical
Supercritical
Internet
Power Grid
Science
Collaboration
Actor Network
Yeast Protein
Interactions
<k>
1
10
60 | NETWORK SCIENCE


Taken together, we find that most real networks are in the 
supercritical regime (Image 3.8). This means that these 
networks have a giant component, but it coexists with 
many disconnected components and nodes. This is true, 
however, only if real networks are accurately described by 
the Erdős-Rényi model, i.e. if real networks are random. In 
the coming chapters, as we learn more about the structure 
of real networks, we will understand why real networks 
can stay connected despite failing the k > lnN criteria.
REAL NETWORKS ARE SUPERCRITICAL | 61


SECTION 8
SMALL WORLD PROPERTY
Small world phenomena, also known as six degrees of sepa­
ration, has long fascinated the general public. It states that 
if you choose any two individuals anywhere on earth, you 
will find a path of at most six acquaintances between them 
(Image 3.9). The fact that individuals who live in the same 
city are only a few handshakes from each other is by no 
means surprising. The small world concept goes further, 
however, stating that even individuals who are on the op­
posite side of the globe are six or fewer hand-shakes from 
us. 
In the language of network science small world phenom­
ena implies that the distance between two randomly chosen 
nodes in a network is surprisingly short. This statement rais­
es two questions: 
Sarah
Ralph
Jane
Peter
w
q
q
q
q
q
q
w
w
w
Image 3.9
Six degrees of separation.
According to six degrees of separation any two individuals, anywhere in 
the world, can be connected through a chain of six or fewer acquaintanc­
es. This means that while Sarah does not know Peter, she knows Ralph, 
who knows Jane and who in turn knows Peter. Hence Sarah is three 
degrees from Peter. In the language of network science six degrees, also 
called the small world property, states that the distance between any two 
nodes in a network is unexpectedly small.
• 
What does short (or small) mean, i.e. short compared 
to what?
• 
How do we explain the existence of these short dis­
tances?
Both of these questions are answered by a simple calcula­
tion within the context of random networks. Consider a 
random network with average degree ‹k›.  A node in this 
network has on average:
	
‹k› nodes at distance one (d=1).
	
‹k›2 nodes at distance two (d=2).
	
‹k›3 nodes at distance three (d=3).
	
...￼
	
‹k›d nodes at distance d.
For example, if  ‹k› ≃ 1,000, we expect 106 individuals at 
distance two and about a billion individuals, i.e. almost 
the whole earth’s population, at distance three from us.
 
To be precise, the expected number of nodes up to distance 
d from our starting node is
	
	
	
	
	
	
(15)
Yet, N(d) must not exceed the total number of nodes, N, in 
the network. Therefore the distances cannot take up arbi­
trary values. We can identify a maximum distance dmax   or 
the network’s diameter at which N(d) reaches N. By setting 
	
	
	
	
    
￼
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(16)
and assuming that ‹k› » 1, we can neglect the (-1) term in 
both the nominator and denominator of Eq. (15), obtain­
ing
	
	
	
	
	
￼
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(17)
Therefore the diameter of a random network follows
	
	
	
	
	
￼
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(18)

N d
k
k
k
k
k
( )
1
...
1
1 .
d
d
2
1
+ 〈〉+ 〈〉+
+ 〈〉= 〈〉
−
〈〉−
+

N d
N
(
)
,
max

k
N.
dmax
〈〉
d
N
k
log
log
,
max ∝
〈〉
62 | NETWORK SCIENCE


which represents the quantitative formulation of the small 
world phenomena. The key, however is its interpretation:
• 
As derived, Eq. (18) predicts the scaling of the network 
diameter, dmax .  Yet, for most networks Eq. (18) offers a 
better approximation to the average distance between 
two randomly chosen nodes, ‹d›, than to dmax (Table 
3.2). This is because dmax is often dominated by a few 
extreme paths, while ‹d› is averaged over all node pairs, 
a process that diminishes the fluctuations. Hence typi­
cally the small world property is defined by 
	
	
	
	
	
	
(19)
describing the dependence on N and ‹k› of the average 
distance in a network.
d
N
k
log
log
,
〈〉∝
〈〉
Network Name
N
L
‹k›
‹d›
dmax
Internet
192,244
609,066
6.34
6.98
26
6.59
WWW
325,729
1,497,134
4.60
11.27
93
8.32
Power Grid
4,941
6,594
2.67
18.99
46
8.66
Mobile Phone Calls
36,595
91,826
2.51
11.72
39
11.42
Email
57,194
103,731
1.81
5.88
18
18.4
Science Collaboration
23,133
186,936
8.08
5.35
15
4.81
Actor Network
212,250
3,054,278
28.78
-
-
-
Citation Network
449,673
4,707,958
10.47
11.21
42
5.55
E Coli Metabolism
1,039
5,802
5.84
2.98
8
4.04
Yeast Protein Interactions
2,018
2,930
2.90
5.61
14
7.14
• 
In general log N « N, hence the dependence of ‹d› on 
logN implies that the distances in a random network 
are orders of magnitude smaller than the size of the net­
work. Consequently small world phenomena implies 
that the average path length or the diameter depends 
logarithmically on the system size. Hence, “small” 
means that ‹d› is proportional to log N, rather than N 
or some power of N (Image 3.10).
• 
The 1 / log ‹k› term implies that the denser the network, 
the smaller is the distance between the nodes.
• 
In real networks there are systematic corrections to Eq. 
(18), rooted in the fact that the number of nodes at dis­
tance d > ‹d› drops rapidly (Advanced Topics 3.F).
Table 3.2
Six degrees of separation.
The average distance ‹d› and the maximum distance dmax  of the ten networks explored in this book. The last column provides ‹d› predicted by Eq. (19), 
indicating that it offers a reasonable approximation to ‹d›. Yet, the agreement is not perfect - we will see in the next chapter that for many real networks 
Eq. (19) needs to be adjusted. For directed networks we list the average out-degree ‹kout› and the path lengths are measured only along the direction of 
the links.
THE SMALL WORLD PROPERTY | 63
N
k
log
log〈〉


Image 3.10
Why are small worlds surprising?
Much of our intuition about distance is based on our experience with reg­
ular lattices, which do not display the small world phenomenon. Indeed, 
• 
For a one-dimensional lattice (a line of length N) the diameter and 
the average path length scale linearly with N: dmax~‹d› ~N. 
• 
For a square lattice dmax~‹d› ~ N1/2.  
• 
For a cubic lattice dmax~‹d› ~ N1/3. 
• 
In general, for a d-dimensional lattice we have dmax ~ ‹d› ~ N1/d.
Such polynomial dependence predicts a much faster increase with N than 
Eq. (19), indicating that in regular lattices the path lengths are signifi­
cantly longer than in a random network. The figure shows the predicted 
N-dependence of ‹d›  for regular and random networks on a linear (left) 
and on a log-log (right) scale. If the social network would form a regular 
2d lattice, where each individual knows only its nearest neighbors, the 
average distance between two individuals would be roughly (7 ×10 9)1/2 = 
83,666. Even if we correct for the fact that a person has about 1,000 ac­
quaintances, not four, the average separation will be orders of magnitude 
larger than predicted by Eq. (19).
Image 3.11
Six degrees? Facebook finds only four.
Milgram’s experiment could not detect the true distance between his 
study’s participants, as he lacked an accurate map of the full social 
network. Today Facebook has the most extensive social network map ever 
assembled. Using Facebook’s social graph of May 2011, consisting of 721 
million active users and 68 billion symmetric friendship links, the average 
distance between the users was 4.74. The figure shows the distance 
distribution, pd , for all pairs of Facebook users worldwide (full dataset) and 
within the US only. Therefore, instead of ‘six degrees’ researchers detected 
only ‘four degrees of separation’ [4], closer to the prediction of Eq. (20) 
than to Milgram’s six degrees [23]. Using Facebook’s N and L Eq. (19) 
predicts the average degree to be approximately 3.90, not far from the 
reported four degrees.
Let us illustrate the implications of Eq. (19) for social net­
works. Using N≃ 7 ×109 and ‹k›≃103, we obtain	 	
	
	
￼
	
	
		
 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
(20)
Therefore, all individuals on Earth should be within three 
to four handshakes of each other, about a half of “six de­
grees”. The estimate (20) is probably closer to the real val­
ue given by Eq. (7) than the frequently quoted six degrees 
(Image 3.11).
While discovered in the context of social systems, the 
small world property applies beyond social networks. In 
Table 3.2 we compare the prediction of Eq. (19) with the 
average path length ‹d› for several real networks, finding 
that despite the diversity of these systems and the signif­
icant differences between them in terms of N and ‹k›, Eq. 
(19) offers a reasonable approximation to the empirically 
observed ‹d›.
The small world property has not only ignited the public’s 
imagination, but plays an important role in network sci­
ence as well. It affects most network characteristics, from 
the spread of ideas in social networks to search on net­
works. The small world phenomena can be reasonably well 
understood in the context of the random network model: 
it is rooted in the fact that the number of nodes at distance 
d from a node increases exponentially with d. While in 
the coming chapters we will see that in real networks we 
encounter systematic deviations from Eq. (19), forcing us 
to replace it with more accurate predictions, the intuition 
offered by the random network model on the origin of the 
phenomenon remains valid.
d
ln7
10
ln(10 )
3.28.
9
3
〈〉=
×
=
64 | NETWORK SCIENCE


Box 3.6a
The first description of small world phenomena goes back to a 
1929 story collection entitled Minden másképpen van (Everything 
is Different) by the Hungarian writer Frigyes Karinthy [21]. In 
Láncszemek (Chains), a short story in the volume, Karinthy sug­
gests that one could name any person among earth’s one and a 
half billion inhabitants (estimated population in 1929) and through 
at most five acquaintances, one of which he knew personally, he 
could link to him. To demonstrate his thesis Karinthy links a Nobel 
Prize winner to himself, noting that the Nobelist must know King 
Gustav, the Swedish monarch who hands out the Nobel Prize, who 
in turn is a consummate tennis player and occasionally plays with a 
tennis champion who is one of Karinthy’s good friends. Remarking 
that finding a chain of acquaintances to celebrities, like a Nobelist, 
is easy, he next links a worker in Ford’s factory to himself: 
“The worker knows the manager in the shop, who knows Ford; Ford 
is on friendly terms with the general director of Hearst Publications, 
who last year became good friends with Árpád Pásztor, someone I 
not only know, but to the best of my knowledge a good friend of 
mine.”
Box 3.6b
The first experimental study of small world phenomena took place 
four decades after Karinthy, in 1967, when Stanley Milgram turned 
the idea into an experiment probing the structure of social net­
works [23]. Milgram chose a stock broker in Boston and a divinity 
student in Sharon, Massachusetts as “targets”. Randomly select­
ed residents of  Wichita, Kansas and Omaha, Nebraska received 
a letter containing a short summary of the study’s purpose, a 
photograph, the name, address and information about the target 
person. They were asked to forward the letter to a friend, relative 
or acquaintance, who is more likely to know the target person.
Milgram wrote in 1969: “I asked a person of intelligence how 
many steps he thought it would take, and he said that it would 
require 100 intermediate persons, or more, to move from Nebraska 
to Sharon.”  Yet, within a few days the first letter arrived, passing 
through only two links. Eventually 42 of the 160 letters made 
it back, some requiring close to a dozen intermediates. These 
completed chains allowed Milgram to determine the number of 
individuals required to get the letter to the target. He found that 
the median number of intermediates was 5.5, a relatively small 
number and remarkably close to Karinthy’s 1929 insight. 
THE SMALL WORLD PROPERTY | 65
Image 3.12
Frigyes Karinthy (1887-1938)
Hungarian writer, journalist and playwright, the first to describe 
the small world property. He remains one of the most popular 
writers in Hungary. English translation of Chains, the 1929 short 
story describing the small world phenomena, is available in [25].
Image 3.13
Stanley Milgram (1933-1984)
American social psychologist known for his experiments on obe­
dience and authority. He designed and carried out the small world 
experiment in 1967 as part of his Harvard dissertation.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF SIX DEGREES


66 | NETWORK SCIENCE
Box 3.6c
The phrase “six degrees of separation” was introduced in 1991 by 
the playwright John Guare, who used it as the title of his Broad­
way play, later turned into a movie. The play’s lead character, Ousa, 
musing about the world’s interconnectedness, tells her daughter:
 
“Everybody on this planet is separated by only six other people. Six 
degrees of separation. Between us and everybody else on this plan­
et. The president of the United States. A gondolier in Venice. It’s not 
just the big names. It’s anyone.  A native in a rain forest.  A Tierra del 
Fuegan. An Eskimo. I am bound to everyone on this planet by a trail 
of six people. It’s a profound thought.  How every person is a new 
door, opening up into other worlds.” 
Milgram’s study was confined to the United States, linking indi­
viduals in Wichita and Omaha to Boston. Guare, however, with 
the sweep of a writer’s imagination, generalized six degrees to the 
whole planet, bringing it closer in spirit to Karinthy’s 1929 descrip­
tion. As more people watch movies than read sociology papers, 
Guare’s version prevailed in popular thought.
Box 3.6d
A new wave of interest in small worlds emerged following 
the 1998 study of Duncan Watts and Steven Strogatz, applied 
mathematicians working at Cornell [30]. They analyzed three real 
systems, the actor network of Hollywood, the neural network 
of the worm C. elegans, and the North American power grid, in 
each case finding that the average distance between the nodes is 
comparable to the random network prediction Eq. (19). Hence they 
found that the small world property applies to networks appearing 
in natural and technological systems as well.  Watts and Strogatz 
also noted that these networks have a much higher clustering 
coefficient than expected for a random network, prompting them 
to propose a model to account for the coexistence of small path 
lengths and large clustering (Image 3.15). The model’s properties 
are discussed in detail in the chapter devoted to social networks. 
Image 3.14
Six Degrees of Separation.
Cover of John Guareís Six Degrees of Separation play, that helped 
turn six degrees into a catch phase of popular culture.
Image 3.15
Watts-Strogatz model.
The model starts from a ring of nodes, each node connected to 
their immediate and next neighbors, a configuration in which 
each node has clustering coefficient C = 3/4 (left, p = 0). With 
probability p each link is rewired to a randomly chosen node. 
For small p the network maintains a high average clustering 
coefficient but the random long-range links drastically decrease 
the distances between the nodes, inducing the small world effect 
(middle). For large p (right, p = 1) the network turns into a random 
network. (After [30]).
A BRIEF HISTORY OF SIX DEGREES


SECTION 9
CLUSTERING COEFFICIENT
The local clustering coefficient Ci captures the density of 
links in node i’s immediate neighborhood: C = 0 means 
that there are no links between i’s neighbors; C = 1 implies 
that each of the i’s neighbors link to each other (Sect. 2.10). 
To calculate Ci for a node in a random network we need 
to estimate the expected number of links Li between the 
node’s ki neighbors. In a random network the probability 
that two of i’s neighbors link to each other is p.  As there are 
ki(ki - 1)/2 possible links between the ki neighbors of node i, 
the expected value of Li is 
	
	
	
	
     ￼
Thus the local clustering coefficient of a random graph is 
	
	
	
	
  
￼
	
		
  	
	
	
	
	
	
	
(21)
Equation (21) makes two predictions:
(a)	 For fixed ‹k›, the larger the network, the smaller is a 
node’s clustering coefficient. Consequently the net­
work’s average clustering coefficient <C> is expected to 
decrease as  1 / N.
 
(b)	 The local clustering coefficient of a node is indepen­
dent of the node’s degree.
To test the validity of Eq. (21) we plot <C>/‹k› in function 
of N for several undirected networks (Image 3.16a). We 
find that <C>/‹k› does not decrease as N-1, but it is largely 
independent of N, in violation of Eq. (21) . In Image 3.16b-
d we also show the dependency of C on the node’s degree 
ki for three real networks, finding that C(k) systematically 
decreases with the degree, again in violation of Eq. (21) . 
Taken together, we find that the random network model 
does not capture the local clustering of real networks. In­
stead real networks have a much higher clustering coeffi­
cient than expected for a random network of similar N and 
L, and high-degree nodes tend to have a smaller clustering 
coefficient than low-degree nodes. 
L
p k k
(
1)
2
.
i
i
i
〈〉=
−
C
L
k k
p
k
N
2
(
1)
.
i
i
i
i
=
〈〉
−
=
= 〈〉






























Internet	  
Science	  
Collabora/on	  
Yeast	  Protein	  
Interac/ons	  
￿C￿/￿k￿
k
N
k
k
(a)	  
(c)	  
(d)	  
(b)	  
C(k)
C(k)
C(k)
Image 3.16
Clustering in real networks.
(a) Comparison between the average clustering coefficient of real net­
works and the prediction Eq. (21) for random networks. Each circle corre­
sponds to a network from Table 3.2. Directed network were made undirect­
ed to calculate C. The dashed line corresponds to Eq. (21), predicting that 
for random networks the average clustering coefficient should decrease as 
N-1. In contrast, for real networks ‹C› has only a weak dependence on N.
(b)-(d) The dependence of the local clustering coefficient, C(k), on the 
node’s degree for (b) the Internet, (c) science collaboration network and 
(d) protein interaction network. C(k) is measured by averaging the local 
clustering coefficient of all nodes with the same degree k. The dashed line 
corresponds to the prediction of Eq. (21) of the random network model, 
for which C(k) is independent of k. In many real networks, the clustering 
coefficient decreases with k.
CLUSTERING COEFFICIENT | 67


SECTION 10
REAL NETWORKS ARE NOT RANDOM
For about four decades following its introduction in 1959 
the random network model has dominated mathematical 
approaches to complex networks. The model suggests that 
if a network is not as regular as a square lattice, we should 
describe it as random. With that it equated complexity 
with randomness.  We must therefore ask: 
Do we really believe that real networks are random? 
The answer is clearly no. The interactions between our 
proteins are governed by the strict laws of biochemistry so 
for the cell to function its chemical architecture can not be 
random. Similarly, in a random society an American stu­
dent would be more likely to have among his friends Chi­
nese factory workers than one of her classmates. In reality 
we suspect the existence of a deep order behind most com­
plex systems. That order must be reflected in the structure 
of the network that describes their architecture, resulting 
in systematic deviations from a pure random configura­
tion.
The degree to which random networks describe (or fail to 
describe) real systems must not be decided by epistemo­
logical arguments, but by a systematic quantitative com­
parison. This is possible because random network theory 
makes a number of quantitative predictions that can be 
tested on real networks:
Degree distribution: The degrees of a random network 
follow a binomial distribution, well approximated by a 
Poisson distribution in the k « N limit. Yet, as shown in 
Image 3.5, the Poisson distribution fails to capture the de­
gree distribution of real networks. Instead in real systems 
we have more highly connected nodes than the random 
network model could account for.
Connectedness: Random network theory predicts that 
for ‹k› > 1 we should observe a giant component, a condi­
tion satisfied by all networks we examined. Most networks 
do not satisfy the ‹k› > ln N condition, which implies that 
these networks should be broken into isolated clusters (Ta­
ble 3.1). Some networks are indeed fragmented, most are 
not.
Average path length: Random network theory predicts 
that the average path length scales as ‹d› ~ logN / log‹k›, a 
prediction that captures the order of magnitude of the path 
lengths. Hence the random network model can account 
for the fundamental features of small world phenomena.
Clustering coefficient: In a random network the local 
clustering coefficient is independent of the node’s degree 
and ‹C› depends on the system size as 1 / N. In contrast, 
measurements indicate that for real networks C decreas­
es with the node degrees and is largely independent of the 
system size (Image 3.16).
Taken together, it appears that the small world phenom­
ena is the only property reasonably explained by the ran­
dom network model. All other network characteristics, 
from the degree distribution to the clustering coefficient, 
are significantly different in real and random networks. In 
fact, the more we learn about real networks, the more we 
will arrive at the startling conclusion that we do not know of 
any real network that is accurately described by the random 
network model.
This conclusion begs a legitimate question: If real net­
works are not random, why did we devote a full chapter 
to the random network model? The answer is simple: the 
model serves as a fundamental reference as we try to un­
derstand the properties of real networks. Each time we ob­
serve some network property we will have to ask if it could 
have emerged by chance. For this we turn to the random 
network model as a guide: if the property is present in the 
model, it means that randomness can account for it. If the 
property is absent in random networks, it may represents 
some signature of order, requiring a deeper explanation. 
So, the random network model may be the wrong model 
for most real systems, yet, it remains quite relevant for net­
work science (Box 3.8).
68 | NETWORK SCIENCE


Random networks and network science.
The lack of agreement between random and real networks raises 
an important question: how could a theory survive so long given 
its poor agreement with reality? The answer is simple: random net­
work theory was never meant to serve as a model of real systems. 
True Erdős and Rényi did write in their first paper [9] that “This 
may be interesting not only from a purely mathematical point of 
view. In fact, the evolution of graphs may be considered as a rath­
er simplified model of the evolution of certain communication nets 
(railways, road or electric network systems, etc.) of a country or 
some unit.” Yet, this is the only mention of the potential practical 
value of their approach. The subsequent development of random 
graphs was driven by inherent mathematical challenges. 
It is tempting to follow Thomas Kuhn and view network science 
as a paradigm change from random graphs to a theory of real 
networks [22]. In reality, there was no network paradigm before 
the end of 1990s. This period is characterized by a lack of interest 
in the problem, without systematic attempts to compare the prop­
erties of real networks with graph theoretical models. The work of 
Erdős and Rényi has gained prominence outside mathematics only 
after the emergence of network science (see Image 3.17). 
Network theory does not lessen the contributions of Erdős and 
Rényi, but demonstrates the unintended importance of their work. 
When we point out the disrepacies between the predictions of the 
random network model and real networks, we do so only to offer a 
proper ground on which we can understand the properties of real 
systems. 
Image 3.17
Network science and random networks.
While today we perceive the Erdős-Rényi model as the cornerstone 
of network theory, the model was hardly known outside a small 
segment of mathematics.  This is illustrated by the yearly citations 
of the first two papers by Erdős and Rényi, published in 1959 and 
1960. For four decades after their publication the papers gathered 
less than 10 citations per year. The number of citations exploded 
after the first papers on scale-free networks [2, 3, 20] have turned 
Erdős and Rényi’s work into the reference model of network 
theory.
REAL NETWORKS ARE NOT RANDOM | 69
Box 3.7


70 | NETWORK SCIENCE
Box 3.8
At a glance: Random networks
• 
Definition:  N nodes, where each node pair is connected with 
probability p.
• 
Average degree:  ￼
• 
Average number of links:  ￼
• 
Degree distribution:  ￼
For sparse networks (k « N), Pk has the Poisson form
￼
• 
Giant component  (NG) :
‹k› < 1: no giant component  (NG~ lnN)
1 < ‹k› < lnN: one giant component and disconnected clusters￼
‹k› > lnN: all nodes join the giant component ￼
• 
Average distance:     ￼
• 
Clustering coefficient:     ￼
p
N
k
p
p
 
1
(1
)
.
k
k
N
k
1
=
−




−
−−
=
−
p
e
k
k! .
k
k
k




N
N
~
G
2
3

N
p
p N
G
i
(
)
−
d
N
k
log
log
,
〈〉∝
〈〉
=
C
k
N .
(
)
=
−
k
p N
1
(
)
=
−
L
p N
1
2
SECTION 11
SUMMARY:
THE FIRST LAW OF NETWORKS
Network science has distilled a small number of funda­
mental organizing principles that govern the structure and 
evolution of real networks. We call these network laws as 
just like the laws of physics, they encode generic principles 
obeyed by many real networks. A network property quan­
tifies as a law if 
(A)	it has a unique quantitative, testable and falsifiable 
formulation; 
(B)	it is obeyed by a large number of real networks; 
(C)	it does not emergence by chance, hence it cannot be 
explained within the context of the random network 
model.
The results of this chapter allow us to formulate the fist of 
these laws:
The First Law: Small World Property
In complex networks there are short 
distances between any pair of nodes.
Evidence for the first law is provided in Sect. 3.8. To recap 
in the context of the criteria A-C:
A.	 Equation (19) offers the quantitative formulation of the 
First Law, predicting that the average distance between 
two randomly chosen nodes scales as a logarithm of 
the system size. Hence node-to-node distances are 
small compared to the network size. 
B.	 Table 3.2 offers evidence that most real networks obey 
the first law. 
C.	 As the small world property is present in random net­
works, the First Law apparently fails criterion C. Yet, 
we will see in the next chapter that in real networks 
distances are different from those expected in random 
networks, forcing us to modify Eq. (19). 


SECTION 12
ADVANCED TOPICS 3.A: 
DERIVING THE POISSON DEGREE DISTRIBUTION
We start from the exact binomial distribution (7)
	
	
	
	
￼
	
		
  
	
	
	
	
	
	
(22)
that characterizes a random graph, and we rewrite the first 
term on the r.h.s. as
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
(23)
The last term of  Eq. (22) can be simplified as
	
	
	￼
and using the series expansion
	
	￼
we obtain
	￼
which is valid if N » k, representing the small degree ap­
proximation at the heart of this derivation. Therefore the 
last term of Eq. (22) becomes
	
	
	
	
￼
	
		
	
 	
	
	
	
	
	
(24)
Combining  Eqs. (22), (23), and (24) we obtain the Poisson 
form of the degree distribution
	
	￼
	
	
    ￼
p
N
k
p
p
1
(1
)
k
k
N
k
1
=
−




−
−−
N
k
N
N
N
N
k
N
k
k N
k
N
k
1
(
1)(
1 1)(
1
2)...(
1
1)(
1
)!
!(
1
)!
(
1)
!
k
−



=
−
−−
−−
−−
+
−−
−−
=
−
p
N
k
k
N
ln[(1
)
]
(
1
)ln(1
1)
N
k
(
1)
−
=
−−
−〈〉
−
−−
x
n
x
x
x
x
x
ln(1
)
( 1)
2
3
...,
|
| 1
n
n
n
1
1
2
3
∑
+
=
−
=
−
+
−
∀
≤
+
=
∞
−
≅
−−
〈〉
−= −〈〉−
−
≅−〈〉
−−
p
N
k
k
N
k
k
N
k
ln[(1
)
]
(
1
)
1
(1
1)
,
N
k
1
p
e
(1
)
.
N
k
k
(
1)
−
=
−−
−〈〉
p
N
k
p
p
N
k
p e
1
(1
)
(
1)
!
k
k
N
k
k
k
k
(
1)
=
−




−
=
−
−−
−〈〉
or
	
	
	
	
  
￼
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(25)
N
k
k
N
e
(
1)
!
1
,
k
k
k
=
−
〈〉
−




−〈〉
p
e
k
k! .
x
k
k
=
〈〉
−〈〉
ADVANCED TOPICS | 71


SECTION 13
ADVANCED TOPICS 3.B: 
MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM DEGREES
To determine the expected degree of the largest node in a 
random network, called the network’s upper cutoff, we de­
fine the degree kmax such that in a network of N nodes we 
have at most one node with degree higher than kmax . Math­
ematically this means that the area behind the Poisson dis­
tribution pk for k ≥ kmax should be approximately one (Im­
age 3.18). Since the area is given by 1- P(kmax), where P(k) 
is the cumulative degree distribution of pk, the network’s 
largest node satisfies: 
	
	
	
	
￼
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(26)
We write    instead of =, because kmax is an integer, so in 
general the exact equation does not have a solution. For a 
Poisson distribution
	
	
	
	
	
	
(27)
where in the last term we approximate the sum with its 
largest (leading) term. 
For N = 109, and ‹k› = 1,000 corresponding to roughly the 
size and average degree of the globe’s social network, we 
obtain kmax = 1,185, indicating that a random network lacks 
extremely popular individuals, or hubs.
We can use a similar argument to calculate the degree of 
the smallest node kmin , or the natural smallest cutoff. In­
deed, by requiring that there should be at most one node 
with degree smaller than kmin we can write
 	
	
	
	
     ￼
 	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
(28)
If P(0) > 1 the equation has no solution and kmin = 0. For the 
ER network we have 
 	
	
	
	
￼
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(29)
Solving Eq. (28) with N = 109 and ‹k› = 1,000 we obtain  kmin 
= 816.

N
P k
1
(
) 
1.
max
−

≈
P k
e
k
k
e
k
k
e
k
k
1
(
)
1
!
!
(
1)!,
max
k
k
k
k
k
k
k k
k
k
max
0
1
1
max
max
max
∑
∑
−
= −
〈〉=
〈〉≈
〈〉
+
−〈〉
=
−〈〉
=
+
∞
−〈〉
+
NP k
(
)
1.
min ≈
P k
e
k
k
(
)
!
min
k
k
k
k
0
min∑
=
〈〉
−〈〉
=
p(k)
k
kmax
This	  area	  under	  the	  
curve	  should	  be	  less	  
than	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  .	  
1/N
Image 3.18
Approximating the minimum and the maximum degree.
The maximum degree kmax is chosen so that there is at most one node 
whose degree is higher than kmax . This is often called the natural upper 
cutoff of a degree distribution. To calculate it, we need to set kmax such 
that the area under the degree distribution pk for k ≥ kmax is exactly equal 
to 1/N, hence this area multiplied by N, capturing the total number of 
nodes expected in the regime, is exactly one.  We follow a similar argu­
ment to determine kmin, or the expected smallest degree.
72 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 14
ADVANCED TOPICS 3.C: 
GIANT COMPONENT
Our aim here is to reproduce the argument, put forward 
independently by Solomonoff and Rapoport [28], and by 
Erdős and Rényi [8], on the emergence of giant component 
at ‹k›= 1 (see also [24]).
Let us denote with u = 1 - NG / N the fraction of nodes that 
are not in the giant component (GC), whose size we take to 
be NG . If node i is part of the GC, it must link to another 
node j, which is also part of the GC. Hence if i is not part of 
the GC, that could happen for two reasons: 
• 
There is no link between i and j (probability for this is 
1- p).
• 
There is a link between i and j, but j is not part of the 
GC (probability for this is pu).
Therefore the total probability that i is not part of the GC 
via node j is 1 - p + pu. The probability that i is not linked 
to the GC via any other node is therefore (1 - p + pu)N - 1, as 
there are N - 1 nodes that could serve as a potential links 
to the GC for node i.  As u is the fraction of nodes that do 
not belong to the GC, for any p and N the solution of the 
equation 
	
	
	
	
￼
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(30)
provides the size of the giant component via NG  = N(1 - u). 
Using p = ‹k› / (N - 1) and taking the log of both sides, for 
‹k› « N we obtain
	
	
	
	
	
	
(31)
Taking an exponential of both sides leads to u = exp[- ‹k›(1 
- u)]. If we denote with S the fraction of nodes in the giant 
component, S = NG / N, then S = 1 - u and Eq. (31) provides
	
	
	
	
   
￼
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(32)
This simple looking equation provides the size of the giant 
component S in function of ‹k› (Image 3.19).  Yet, Eq. (32) 
does not have a closed solution. We can solve it graphically 
by plotting  the right hand side of Eq. (32) as a function of 
S for various values of ‹k›.  To have a nonzero solution, the 
obtained curve must intersect with the dotted diagonal, 
representing the left hand side of Eq. (32). For small ‹k› the 
two curves intersect each other only for S = 0, indicating 
that for small ‹k›, the size of the giant component is zero. 
Only when ‹k› exceeds a threshold value, does a non-zero 
solution emerge.
To determine the value of ‹k› at which we start having a 
nonzero solution we take a derivative of Eq. (32), as the 
phase transition point is when the r.h.s. of Eq. (32) has the 
same derivative as the l.h.s. of Eq. (32), i.e.
	
	
	
	
	
￼
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(33)
Setting S = 0, we obtain that the phase transition point is 
at ‹k› = 1.
u
p
pu
(1
)N 1
=
−
+
−

u
N
k
N
u
ln 
(
1)ln 1
1(1
) .
−
−〈〉
−
−




S
e
 = 1
.
k S
−
−〈〉
d
dS
e
1
1,
k S
(
)
−
=
−〈〉
k e
1.
k S
〈〉
=
−〈〉
Image 3.19
Graphical solution for the size of the giant component.
(a) The three curves in the left panel show y = 1-exp[ -‹k› S ] for various 
‹k›. The diagonal dashed line corresponds y = S, and the intersection of the 
dotted and continuous lines provides the solution to Eq. (32), 
S = 1-exp[ -‹k›S ]. For the bottom curve there is only one intersection, at 
S = 0, indicating the absence of a giant component. The top curve a solu­
tion at S = 0.583... (vertical dashed line). The middle curve is precisely at 
the threshold between the regime where a non-zero solution for S exists 
and the regime where there is only the solution S = 0. 
(b) The size of the giant component in function of ‹k› as predicted by 
Eq. (32) [24].
ADVANCED TOPICS | 73


SECTION 15
ADVANCED TOPICS 3.D: 
COMPONENT SIZES
In Image 3.5 we focused only on the size of the giant com­
ponent, leaving an important question open: how many 
smaller components do we expect for a given ‹k›, and what 
is their expected sizes? The aim of this section is to discuss 
these topics. 
Component size distribution: For a random network 
the probability that a randomly chosen node belongs to a 
component of size s (different from the giant component 
G ) is [24]
	
	
	
	￼
 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
(34)
Replacing ‹k›s-1 with exp[(s-1) ln‹k›]  and using the 
Stirling-formula ￼
for large s we obtain
	
	
	
    ￼
 	
	
	
	
 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
(35)
Therefore the component size distribution has two contri­
butions: a slowly decreasing power law term s-3/2 and a rap­
idly decreasing exponential term e-(‹k›-1)s+(s-1)ln‹k›. Given that 
an exponential dominates for large s, Eq. (35) predicts that 
large components are prohibited.  The only exception is at 
the critical point, ‹k›=1, where all terms in the exponential 
cancel, hence ps follows the power law
	
	
	
	
	
￼
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(36) 
As a power law decreases relatively slowly, at the critical 
point we expect to observe clusters of widely different 
sizes, a property consistent with the behavior of a system 
during a phase transition (Advanced Topics 3.E). These 
predictions are supported by numerical simulations in 
Image 3.20, that shows ps for three ‹k› values.
Average component size: The calculations also indicate 
that the average component size  (once again, excluding 
the giant component) follows [24]
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
.	
(37)
For ‹k› < 1 we lack a giant component (NG = 0), hence 
Eq. (37) becomes 
	
	
	
	
    ￼
                     	 	
  	
	
	
	
	
       ,	
	
(38)
which diverges when the average degree approaches the 
critical point ‹k› = 1.  Therefore as we approach the criti­
cal point, the clusters are becoming bigger, signaling the 
p
s k
s
e
~ (
)
!
.
s
s
k s
1
〈〉
−
−〈〉
p
s
e
~
.
s
k
s
s
k
3/2
(
1)
(
1)ln
−
−〈〉−
+
−
〈〉
s
s
s
e
!
2
s
π
≈




p
s
~
.
s
3/2
−
s
k
k N
N
1
1
/
G
〈〉= −〈〉+ 〈〉
s
k
1
1
〈〉= −〈〉
Image 3.20
Component size distribution.
Component size distribution in a random network, ps, excluding the giant 
component. (a)-(c) shows ps for different ‹k› values and N, indicating that 
ps converges for large N to the prediction (34). In (d) we show the results 
for N = 104, plotting together ps for different ‹k›. The plot clearly shows 
that while for ‹k› < 1 and ‹k› > 1 the ps has a exponential form, right at the 
critical point ‹k› = 1 the distribution follows the power law (36). The dotted 
line in each image correspond to the theoretical prediction (35). The first 
numerical study of the component size distribution in random networks 
was carried out in 1998, preceeding the exploding interest in complex 
networks.
74 | NETWORK SCIENCE


Image 3.21
Average component size.
a.	
Upper curve: the average size <s> of a component to which a ran­
domly chosen node belongs to as predicted by Eq. (39). Lower curve: 
the overall average size <s’> of a component as predicted by Eq. (37). 
The dotted vertical line marks ‹k› = 1 (Redrawn after Newman, 2010).
b.	
The average cluster size in a network measured in by numerical 
simulations, where we picked a node in the network and determined 
the size of the cluster it belongs to. This measure is biased, as each 
component of size s’ will be counted s’ times. The larger N becomes, 
the more closely the numerical data follows the prediction of Eq. (37). 
As predicted, <s> diverges at the ‹k›=1, critical point, supporting the 
existence of a phase transition in the system (Advanced Topics 3.F).
c.	
The average cluster size in a network, where we corrected for the bias 
in (b) by selecting each component only once.The larger N becomes, 
the more closely the numerical data follows the prediction of Eq. (39). 
emergence of the giant component at ‹k› = 1. Once again, 
numerical simulation support these predictions for large 
N (Image 3.21).
To determine the average component size for ‹k› > 1 using 
Eq. (37), we need to first determine the size of the giant 
component. This can be done in a self-consistent manner, 
obtaining that the average cluster size decreases for 
‹k› > 1, as most of the clusters are gradually absorbed by the 
giant component.
Note that Eq. (37) predicts the size of the component to 
which a randomly chosen node belongs to. This is a biased 
measure, as the chance of belonging to a larger cluster is 
higher than the chance of belonging to a smaller one. The 
bias is linear in the cluster size, s. If we correct for this bias, 
we obtain the average size of the small components that we 
would get if we were to inspect each cluster one by one and 
measuring their average size [24]
	
	
	￼
 	
	
	
	
  	
	
	
	
	
	
	
(39)
Image 3.21 again offers numerical support for Eq. (39).
s
k
k N
N
2
2
/
.
G
〈′〉=
−〈〉+ 〈〉
ADVANCED TOPICS | 75


SECTION 16
ADVANCED TOPICS 3.E: 
SUPERCRITICAL REGIME.
To determine the value of ‹k› at which most nodes became 
part of the giant component, we calculate the probability 
that a randomly selected node does not have a link to the 
giant component, which is ￼
                            , as in this re­
gime NG ≃ N. The expected number of such isolated nodes 
is
	
	
	
	
	
	
(40)
where we used ￼
                          , an approximation valid for
 large n. If we make p sufficiently large, we arrive to the 
point where only one node remains disconnected from the 
giant component.  At this point IN = 1, hence according to 
Eq. (40) p needs to satisfy ￼
               . Consequently, the 
value of p at which we are about to enter the fully connect­
ed regime is
	
	
	
	
	
￼
	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
(41)
which leads to Eq. (14) in terms of ‹k›.
I
N
p
N
N p
N
Ne
(1
)
1
,
N
N
N
Np
=
−
=
−
⋅




≈
−
p
N
N
~ ln
,
Ne
1
Np =
−
x
n
e
(1
)n
x
−
≈
−
p
p
(1
)
(1
)
N
N
G
−
≈
−
76 | NETWORK SCIENCE


SECTION 17
ADVANCED TOPICS 3.F: 
PHASE TRANSITIONS.
The emergence of the giant component at ‹k›=1 in the ran­
dom network model is reminiscent of a phase transition, a 
much studied phenomenon in physics and chemistry [29]. 
Consider two examples:
i.	
Water-Ice Transition (Image 3.22a): At high tempera­
tures the H2O molecules engage in a diffusive dance, 
forming small groups and then breaking apart to group 
up with other molecules. If cooled, at 0˚C the mole­
cules suddenly form a perfectly ordered ice crystal. 
ii.	 Magnetism (Image 3.22b): In ferromagnetic metals like 
iron at high temperatures the spins point in randomly 
chosen directions. Under some critical temperature Tc, 
however, all atoms orient their spins in the same direc­
tion and the metal becomes a magnet.
The freezing of a liquid and the emergence of magneti­
zation are examples of phase transitions, representing 
transitions from disorder to order. Indeed, relative to the 
perfect order of the crystalline ice, liquid water is rather 
disordered. Similarly, the randomly oriented spins in a 
ferromagnetic take up the highly ordered common orien­
tation under Tc. 
Many properties of a system undergoing a phase transition 
are universal, that is, they are the same in a wide range of 
systems, from magma freezing into rock to a ceramic ma­
terial turning into a superconductor. Furthermore, near 
the phase transition point, called the critical point, many 
quantities of interest follow power-laws.  The phenomena 
observed near the critical point ‹k›=1 in a random network 
in many ways is similar to such a phase transition:
• 
The similarity between Image 3.6a and the magneti­
zation diagram of Image 3.22b is not accidental: they 
both show transition from disorder to order, man­
ifested as the emergence of a giant component as ‹k› 
exceeds ‹k›=1 in a random network. 
• 
As we approach the freezing point, ice crystals of wide­
ly different sizes are observed, and so are domains of 
atoms with spins pointing in the same direction. The 
size distribution of the ice crystals or magnetic do­
mains follows a power law. Similarly, while for 
• 
‹k› < 1 and ‹k› > 1 the cluster sizes follow an exponen­
tial distribution, in a random network right at the 
phase transition point, ps follows a power law given 
by Eq.(36), implying the coexistence of components of 
widely different sizes.
• 
At the critical point the average size of the ice crystals 
or of the magnetic domains diverges, assuring that the 
whole system turns into a single frozen ice crystal or 
that all spins point in the same direction. Similarly in 
a random network the average cluster size <s> diverges 
as we approach ‹k› = 1 (Advanced Topics 3.D).
ADVANCED TOPICS | 77


Image 3.22a
Water-Ice phase transition.
The hydrogen bonds that hold the water molecules together (dotted lines) are weak, constantly breaking up and re-forming, maintaining partially 
ordered local structures (left panel). The temperature-pressure phase diagram indicates (center panel) that by lowering the temperature, the water 
undergoes a phase transition, moving from a liquid (orange) to a frozen solid (red). In the solid phase each water molecule binds rigidly to four other 
molecules, forming an ice lattice (right panel). After http://www.lbl.gov/Science-Articles/Archive/sabl/2005/February/ water-solid.html; phase diagram 
after http://stevengoddard.wordpress.com/2010/09/02/the-ideal-world-phase-diagrams-part-deux/ 
Image 3.22b
Magnetic phase phase transition.
In magnetic materials the magnetic moments of the individual atoms (spins) can point in two different directions.  At high temperatures they choose 
randomly their direction (right panel), hence the system’s total magnetization, m =  ∆M / N, where ∆M is the number of up spins minus the number of 
down spins, is zero. The phase diagram (middle panel) indicates that by lowering the temperature X, the system undergoes a phase transition at T = Tc  
when a nonzero magnetization emerges, hence m = M / N converges to one. In this ordered phase all spins point in the same direction (left panel).
78 | NETWORK SCIENCE


	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
(44)
Hence if ‹k› increases, the second and the third terms van­
ish and the solution (42) converges to the result (18). 
SECTION 18
ADVANCED TOPICS 3.G: 
CORRECTION TO SMALL WORLDS
Equation (18) offers only a rough approximation to the 
network diameter, valid for very large N and small d. In­
deed, as soon as ‹k›d approaches the system size N the ‹k›d 
scaling must break down, as we are hitting the boundary 
of the network and there are not enough nodes to continue 
the ‹k›d expansion. Such finite size effects result in correc­
tions to Eq. (18). 
For a random network with average degree ‹k›, the network 
diameter is better approximated by (Fernholz & Ramach­
andran, 2007)
	
	
	
	
	
	
(42)
where  the Lambert W-function W(z) is the principal in­
verse of  f(z) = z exp(z). The first term on the r.h.s is Eq. 
(18), while the second is the correction that depends on the 
average degree. The correction increases the diameter, ac­
counting for the fact that when we approach the network’s 
diameter the number of modes must grow slower than ‹k› . 
The magnitude of the correction becomes more obvious if 
we consider the various limits of Eq. (42).
In the ‹k› q 0 limit, i.e. when the network approaches 
the phase transition point, we can determine the Lambert 
W-function and the diameter becomes 
	
	
	
	
	￼
 	
(43)
Hence in the moment when the giant component emerg­
es the network diameter is three times our prediction (18). 
This is due to the fact that at the critical point ‹k› = 1 the 
network has a tree-like structure, consisting of long chains 
with hardly any loops, a configuration that significantly 
increases dmax .
In the ‹k› q ∞ limit, corresponding to a very dense net­
work, Eq. (42) becomes
d
N
k
N
W k
k
ln
ln
2ln
ln[
(
exp
)],
max =
〈〉+
−
〈〉
−〈〉
d
N
k
3 ln
ln
.
max =
〈〉
d
N
k
N
k
N
k
k
ln
ln
2ln
ln
ln
.
max
2
=
〈〉+ 〈〉+
〈〉
〈〉




BIBLIOGRAPHY | 79


SECTION 19
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barabási,  A.-L. (2003). Linked: The new science of net­
works. New York: Plume Books, 1 edition.
Barabási,  A.-L. & Albert R. (1999). Emergence of scal­
ing in random networks. Science, 286:509-512.
Barabási,  A.-L.,  Albert, R., and Jeong, H. (1999). 
Meanfield theory for scale-free random networks. 
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applica­
tions, 272:173-187.
Backstrom, L., Boldi, P., Rosa, M., Ugander, J. & 
Vigna, S. (2011). Four degrees of separation. CoRR, 
abs/1111.4570.
Bollobás, B. (2001). Random Graphs. Cambridge 
University Press.
Christensen, K., Donangelo, R., Koiller, B., and 
Sneppen, K. (1998). Evolution of Random Networks. 
Physical Review Letters, 81:2380-2383.
Csicsery, G. P. (1993). N is a Number: A Portait of Paul 
Erdős.
Erdős, P. & Rényi, A. (1959). On random graphs, I. 
Publicationes Mathematicae (Debrecen), 6:290-297.
Erdős, P. & Rényi, A. (1960). On the evolution of ran­
dom graphs. Publ. Math. Inst. Hung. Acad. Sci., 5:17-
61.
Erdős, P. & Rényi, A. (1961a). On the evolution of ran­
dom graphs. Bull. Inst. Internat. Statist., 38:343-347.
Erdős, P. & Rényi A. (1961b), On the Strength of Con­
nectedness of a Random Graph, Acta Math. Acad. Sci. 
Hungary 12: 261–267. 
Erdős, P. & Rényi, A. (1963). Asymmetric graphs. Acta 
Mathematica Acod. Sci. Hungarica, 14(3-4):295-315.
Erdős, P. & Rényi, A. (1966). On random matrices. 
Publ. Math. Inst. Hung. Acad. Sci., 8:455-461.
Erdős, P. & Rényi, A. (1966). On the existence of a fac­
tor of degree one of a connected random graph. Acta 
Math. Acad. Sci. Hungar., 17:359-368.
Erdős, P. & Rényi, A. (1968). On random matrices II. 
Studia Sci. Math. Hung., 13:459-464.
Fernholz, D. & Ramachandran, V. (2007). The diam­
eter of sparse random graphs. Random Structures and 
Algorithms, 31(4):482-516.
Freeman, L. C. & Thompson, C. R. (1989). Estimating 
Acquaintanceship. Volume, pg. 147-158, in The Small 
World, Edited by Manfred Kochen (Ablex, Norwood, 
NJ)
Gilbert, E. N. (1959). Random graphs. The Annals of 
Mathematical Statistics, 30:1141-1144.
Hoffman, P. (1998). The Man Who Loved Only Num­
bers: The Story of Paul Erdős and the Search for Math­
ematical Truth. Hyperion Books.
Jeong, H., Albert, R. & Barabási, A. L. (1999). Inter­
net: Diameter of the world-wide web. Nature, 401:130-
131.
Frigyes K. , “Láncszemek,” in Minden másképpen 
van (Budapest: Atheneum Irodai es Nyomdai R.-T. 
Kiadása, 1929), 85–90. English translation is avail­
able in (Newman, Barabási, and Watts, 2006).
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolu­
tions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962.
Milgram, S. (1967). The Small World Problem. Psy­
chology Today, 2: 60-67.
Newman, M. (2010). Networks: An Introduction. Ox­
ford University Press, 1 edition.
Newman, M., Barabási, A. L., and Watts, D. J. 
(2006). The Structure and Dynamics of Networks. 
Princeton University Press.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
80 | NETWORK SCIENCE


Rosenthal, H. (1960).  Acquaintances and contacts of 
Franklin Roosevelt. Unpublished thesis. Massachu­
setts Institute of Technology.
Schechter, B. (1998). My Brain is Open: The Mathe­
matical Journeys of Paul Erdős. Simon & Schuster.
Solomonoff, R. & Rapoport, A. (1951). Connectivity 
of random nets. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, 
13:107-117.
Stanley, H. E. (1987). Introduction to Phase Transitions 
and Critical Phenomena. Oxford University Press.
Watts, D. J. & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dy­
namics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature 393: 409–10.
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 81
