
 
 
   
   I. Python and Finance 1. Why Python for Finance? 









 What Is Python? 





















 Brief History of Python 













 The Python Ecosystem 













 Python User Spectrum 













 The Scientific Stack 





 













 Technology in Finance 













 Technology Spending 













 Technology as Enabler 













 Technology and Talent as Barriers to Entry 













 Ever-Increasing Speeds, Frequencies, Data Volumes 













 The Rise of Real-Time Analytics 





 













 Python for Finance 















 Finance and Python Syntax 













 Efficiency and Productivity Through Python 













 From Prototyping to Production 





 













 AI-First Finance 









 Data Availability 













 Machine & Deep Learning 













 Traditional vs. AI-First Finance 





 













 Conclusions 













 Further Reading 







 2. Python Infrastructure 









 Introduction 













 Conda as a Package Manager 











 Installing Miniconda 3.6 













 Basic Operations with Conda 





 













 Conda as a Virtual Environment Manager 













 Using Docker Containerization 















 Docker Images and Containers 













 Building an Ubuntu & Python Docker Image 





 













 Using Cloud Instances 























 RSA Public and Private Keys 













 Jupyter Notebook Configuration File 













 Installation Script for Python and Jupyter Notebook 













 Script to Orchestrate the Droplet Set-up 





 













 Conclusions 













 Further Resources 







 II. Mastering the Basics 3. Data Types and Structures 









 Introduction 













 Basic Data Types 











 Integers 













 Floats 













 Boolean 













 Strings 













 Excursion: Printing and String Replacements 













 Excursion: Regular Expressions 





 













 Basic Data Structures 












 Tuples 













 Lists 













 Excursion: Control Structures 













 Excursion: Functional Programming 













 Dicts 













 Sets 





 













 Conclusions 













 Further Resources 







 4. Numerical Computing with NumPy 









 Introduction 













 Arrays of Data 















 Arrays with Python Lists 













 The Python Array Class 





 













 Regular NumPy Arrays 











 The Basics 













 Multiple Dimensions 













 Meta-Information 













 Reshaping and Resizing 













 Boolean Arrays 













 Speed Comparison 





 













 Structured NumPy Arrays 













 Vectorization of Code 











 Basic Vectorization 













 Memory Layout 





 













 Conclusions 













 Further Resources 







 5. Data Analysis with pandas 









 Introduction 













 DataFrame Class 











 First Steps with DataFrame Class 













 Second Steps with DataFrame Class 





 













 Basic Analytics 













 Basic Visualization 













 Series Class 













 GroupBy Operations 













 Complex Selection 













 Concatenation, Joining and Merging 













 Concatenation 













 Joining 













 Merging 





 













 Performance Aspects 













 Conclusions 













 Further Reading 







 6. Object Orientated Programming 









 Introduction 













 A Look at Python Objects 











 int 













 list 













 ndarray 













 DataFrame 





 













 Basics of Python Classes 













 Python Data Model 













 Conclusions 













 Further Resources 













 Python Codes 









 Vector Class 





 







 7. Data Visualization 




















 Static 2D Plotting 














 One-Dimensional Data Set 













 Two-Dimensional Data Set 













 Other Plot Styles 





 













 Static 3D Plotting 













 Interactive 2D Plotting 

















 Basic Plots 













 Financial Plots 





 













 Conclusions 













 Further Reading 







 8. Financial Time Series 
















 Financial Data 













 Data Import 













 Summary Statistics 













 Changes over Time 













 Resampling 





 













 Rolling Statistics 













 An Overview 













 A Technical Analysis Example 





 













 Correlation Analysis 











 The Data 













 Logarithmic Returns 













 OLS Regression 













 Correlation 





 













 High Frequency Data 













 Conclusions 













 Further Reading 







 9. Input/Output Operations 























 Basic I/O with Python 











 Writing Objects to Disk 













 Reading and Writing Text Files 













 SQL Database 













 Writing and Reading NumPy Arrays 





 













 I/O with pandas 






















 SQL Database 













 From SQL to pandas 













 Data as CSV File 













 Data as Excel File 





 













 Fast I/O with PyTables 
















 Working with Tables 













 Working with Compressed Tables 













 Working with Arrays 













 Out-of-Memory Computations 





 













 I/O with TsTables 











 Sample Data 













 Data Storage 













 Data Retrieval 





 













 Conclusions 













 Further Reading 







 
 
 



 
 
   
   
 
 



 
 
   
   
 Python for Finance 

 Second Edition 

 Yves Hilpisch 
 
 
 



 
 
   
   
   Python for Finance 
   
    by 
     Yves  
     Hilpisch 
   
   Copyright © 2018 Yves Hilpisch. All rights reserved. 
   Printed in the United States of America. 
   
    Published by 
     O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
    , 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.
   
   
    O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales
    promotional use. Online editions are also available for most titles ( http://oreilly.com/safari ). For more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales
    department: 800-998-9938 or 
     corporate@oreilly.com .
   
   
     
       Editor: 
       Susan Conant
     
     
       Production Editor: 
       Nicholas Adams
     
     
       Interior Designer: 
       David Futato
     
     
       Cover Designer: 
       Karen Montgomery
     
     
       Illustrator: 
       Rebecca Demarest
     
   
   
   
     
       April 2018: 
       Second Edition
     
   
   
   
     Revision History for the Early Release 
     
       
         2018-04-10: 
         First Release
       
     
   
   
    See 
     http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781492024279 
     for release details.
   
   
     
      The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
       Python for Finance , the cover image, and related trade dress are
      trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
     
     
      While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to
      ensure that the information and instructions contained in this work are
      accurate, the publisher and the author disclaim all responsibility for
      errors or omissions, including without limitation responsibility for
      damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work. Use of the
      information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk.
      If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is
      subject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of
      others, it is your responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies
      with such licenses and/or rights.
       
       
     
   
   
     978-1-492-02427-9 
     [LSI] 
   
 
 
 



 
 
   
   
 Part I.  Python and Finance 

 
 This part introduces Python for finance. It consists of three chapters: 

 
 
 Chapter 1  briefly discusses Python in general and argues why Python is indeed well suited to address the technological challenges in the finance industry and in financial (data) analytics. 
 
 
 Chapter 2  is on Python infrastructure and is meant to provide a concise overview of important aspects of managing a Python environment to get started with interactive financial analytics and financial application development in Python 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
 
   
   
 Chapter 1.  Why Python for Finance? 

 
 Banks are essentially technology firms. 
 Hugo Banziger 
 






 
 What Is Python? 

 Python is a high-level, multipurpose programming language that is used in a wide range of domains and technical fields. On the Python website you find the following executive summary (see  https://www.python.org/doc/essays/blurb ): 
 
 Python is an interpreted, object-oriented, high-level programming language with dynamic semantics. Its high-level built in data structures, combined with dynamic typing and dynamic binding, make it very attractive for Rapid Application Development, as well as for use as a scripting or glue language to connect existing components together. Python’s simple, easy to learn syntax emphasizes readability and therefore reduces the cost of program maintenance. Python supports modules and packages, which encourages program modularity and code reuse. The Python interpreter and the extensive standard library are available in source or binary form without charge for all major platforms, and can be freely distributed. 

 This pretty well describes  why  Python has evolved into one of the major programming languages as of today. Nowadays, Python is used by the beginner programmer as well as by the highly skilled expert developer, at schools, in universities, at web companies, in large corporations and financial institutions, as well as in any scientific field. 

 Among others, Python is characterized by the following features: 
 
 Open source 
 
 Python and the majority of supporting libraries and tools available are open source and generally come with quite flexible and open licenses. 
 
 Interpreted 
 
 The reference  CPython  implementation is an interpreter of the language that translates Python code at runtime to executable byte code. 
 
 Multiparadigm 
 
 Python supports different programming and implementation paradigms, such as object orientation and imperative, functional, or procedural programming. 
 
 Multipurpose 
 
 Python can be used for rapid, interactive code development as well as for building large applications; it can be used for low-level systems operations as well as for high-level analytics tasks. 
 
 Cross-platform 
 
 Python is available for the most important operating systems, such as Windows, Linux, and Mac OS; it is used to build desktop as well as web applications; it can be used on the largest clusters and most powerful servers as well as on such small devices as the Raspberry Pi (see  http://www.raspberrypi.org ). 
 
 Dynamically typed 
 
 Types in Python are in general inferred during runtime and not statically declared as in most compiled languages. 
 
 Indentation aware 
 
 In contrast to the majority of other programming languages, Python uses indentation for marking code blocks instead of parentheses, brackets, or semicolons. 
 
 Garbage collecting 
 
 Python has automated garbage collection, avoiding the need for the programmer to manage memory. 
 
 

 When it comes to Python syntax and what Python is all about, Python Enhancement Proposal 20—i.e., the so-called “Zen of Python”—provides the major guidelines. It can be accessed from every interactive shell with the command  import this : 

 In [1]: import this

        The Zen of Python, by Tim Peters

        Beautiful is better than ugly.
        Explicit is better than implicit.
        Simple is better than complex.
        Complex is better than complicated.
        Flat is better than nested.
        Sparse is better than dense.
        Readability counts.
        Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules.
        Although practicality beats purity.
        Errors should never pass silently.
        Unless explicitly silenced.
        In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess.
        There should be one-- and preferably only one --obvious way to do it.
        Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you're Dutch.
        Now is better than never.
        Although never is often better than *right* now.
        If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea.
        If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea.
        Namespaces are one honking great idea -- let's do more of those! 








 
 Brief History of Python 

 Although Python might still have the appeal of something  new  to some people, it has been around for quite a long time. In fact, development efforts began in the 1980s by Guido van Rossum from the Netherlands. He is still active in Python development and has been awarded the title of  Benevolent Dictator for Life  by the Python community (see  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Python ). The following can be considered milestones in the development of Python: 

 
 
 Python 0.9.0  released in 1991 (first release) 
 
 
 Python 1.0  released in 1994 
 
 
 Python 2.0  released in 2000 
 
 
 Python 2.6  released in 2008 
 
 
 Python 3.0  released in 2008 
 
 
 Python 3.1  released in 2009 
 
 
 Python 2.7  released in 2010 
 
 
 Python 3.2  released in 2011 
 
 
 Python 3.3  released in 2012 
 
 
 Python 3.4  released in 2014 
 
 
 Python 3.5  released in 2015 
 
 
 Python 3.6  released in 2016 
 
 

 It is remarkable, and sometimes confusing to Python newcomers, that there are two major versions available, still being developed and, more importantly, in parallel use since 2008. As of this writing, this will probably keep on for a little while since a mass of code available and in production is still Python 2.6/2.7. While the first edition of this book was based on Python 2.7, this second edition uses Python 3.6 throughout. 
 













 
 The Python Ecosystem 

 A major feature of Python as an ecosystem, compared to just being a programming language, is the availability of a large number of packages and tools. These packages and tools generally have to be  imported  when needed (e.g., a plotting library) or have to be started as a separate system process (e.g., a Python development environment). Importing means making a package available to the current namespace and the current Python interpreter process. 

 Python itself already comes with a large set of packages and modules that enhance the basic interpreter in different directions. One speaks of the  Python Standard Library  (see  https://docs.python.org/3/library/index.html ). For example, basic mathematical calculations can be done without any importing, while more specialized mathematical functions need to be imported through the  math  module: 

 In   [ 2 ]:   100   *   2.5   +   50 
 Out [ 2 ]:   300.0 

 In   [ 3 ]:   log ( 1 ) 

         ---------------------------------------- 
         NameErrorTraceback   ( most   recent   call   last ) 
         < ipython - input - 3 - cfa4946d0225 >   in   < module > () 
 ---->   1   log ( 1 ) 

         NameError :   name   'log'   is   not   defined 


 In   [ 4 ]:   import   math 

 In   [ 5 ]:   math . log ( 1 ) 
 Out [ 5 ]:   0.0 

 While  math  is a standard Python library available with any installation, there are many more libraries that can be installed optionally and that can be used in the very same fashion as the standard libraries. Such libraries are available from different (web) sources. However, it is generally advisable to use a Python package manager that makes sure that all libraries are consistent with each other (see  Chapter 2  for more on this topic). 

 The code examples presented so far all use  IPython  (see  http://www.ipython.org ), which is one of the most popular interactive development environments (IDE) for Python. Although it started out as an enhanced shell only, it today has many features typically found in IDEs (e.g., support for profiling and debugging). Those features missing are typically provided by advanced text/code editors, like Sublime Text (see  http://www.sublimetext.com ). Therefore, it is not unusual to combine  IPython  with one’s text/code editor of choice to form the basic tool set for a Python development process. 

 IPython  enhances the standard interactive shell in many ways. For example, it provides improved command-line history functions and allows for easy object inspection. For instance, the help text ( docstring ) for a function is printed by just adding a  ?  behind or before the function name (adding  ??  will provide even more information). 

 IPython  originally came in two popular versions: a  shell  version and a  browser-based version  (the  Notebook ). The  Notebook  variant has proven to be that useful and popular that it has become an independent, language-agnostic project and tool, called  Jupyter  now (see  http://jupyter.org ). 
 













 
 Python User Spectrum 

 Python does not only appeal to professional software developers; it is also of use for the casual developer as well as for domain experts and scientific developers. 

 Professional software developers  find all that they need to efficiently build large applications. Almost all programming paradigms are supported; there are powerful development tools available; and any task can, in principle, be addressed with Python. These types of users typically build their own frameworks and classes, also work on the fundamental Python and scientific stack, and strive to make the most of the ecosystem. 

 Scientific developers  or  domain experts  are generally heavy users of certain libraries and frameworks, have built their own applications that they enhance and optimize over time, and tailor the ecosystem to their specific needs. These groups of users also generally engage in longer interactive sessions, rapidly prototyping new code as well as exploring and visualizing their research and/or domain data sets. 

 Casual programmers  like to use Python generally for specific problems they know that Python has its strengths in. For example, visiting the gallery page of  matplotlib , copying a certain piece of visualization code provided there, and adjusting the code to their specific needs might be a beneficial use case for members of this group. 

 There is also another important group of Python users:  beginner programmers , i.e., those that are just starting to program. Nowadays, Python has become a very popular language at universities, colleges, and even schools to introduce students to programming. 1  A major reason for this is that its basic syntax is easy to learn and easy to understand, even for the nondeveloper. In addition, it is helpful that Python supports almost all programming styles. 2 
 













 
 The Scientific Stack 

 There is a certain set of libraries that is collectively labeled the  scientific stack . This stack comprises, among others, the following packages: 
 
 NumPy 
 
 NumPy  provides a multidimensional array object to store homogeneous or heterogeneous data; it also provides optimized functions/methods to operate on this array object. 
 
 SciPy 
 
 SciPy  is a collection of sub-packages and functions implementing important standard functionality often needed in science or finance; for example, one finds functions for cubic splines interpolation as well as for numerical integration. 
 
 matplotlib 
 
 This is the most popular plotting and visualization library for Python, providing both 2D and 3D visualization capabilities. 
 
 PyTables 
 
 PyTables  is a popular wrapper for the  HDF5  data storage library (see  http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/ ); it is a library to implement optimized, disk-based I/O operations based on a hierarchical database/file format. 
 
 pandas 
 
 pandas  builds on  NumPy  and provides richer classes for the management and analysis of time series and tabular data; it is tightly integrated with  matplotlib  for plotting and  PyTables  for data storage and retrieval. 
 
 Scikit-Learn 
 
 Scikit-Learn  is a popular machine learning (ML) package that provides a unified API for many different ML algorithms, for instance, for estimation, classification or clustering. 
 
 

 Depending on the specific domain or problem, this stack is enlarged by additional libraries, which more often than not have in common that they build on top of one or more of these fundamental libraries. However, the  least common denominator  or  basic building block  in general is the  NumPy   ndarray  class (see  Chapter 4 ), or nowadays the  pandas   DataFrame  class (see  Chapter 5 ). 

 Taking Python as a programming language alone, there are a number of other languages available that can probably keep up with its syntax and elegance. For example,  Ruby  is quite a popular language often compared to Python. On the language’s web site  http://www.ruby-lang.org  you find the following description: 
 
 A dynamic, open source programming language with a focus on simplicity and productivity. It has an elegant syntax that is natural to read and easy to write. 

 The majority of people using Python would probably also agree with the exact same statement being made about Python itself. However, what distinguishes Python for many users from equally appealing languages like  Ruby  is the availability of the scientific stack. This makes Python not only a good and elegant language to use, but also one that is capable of replacing domain-specific languages and tool sets like Matlab or R. It provides by default also anything that you would expect, say, as a seasoned web developer or systems administrator. In addition, Python is also good at interfacing with domain specific languages, such as R, so that the decision usually is not about  either Python or something else  — it is rather about which language should be the major one. 
 





 













 
 Technology in Finance 

 Now that we have some rough ideas of what Python is all about, it makes sense to step back a bit and to briefly contemplate the role of technology in finance. This will put us in a position to better judge the role Python already plays and, even more importantly, will probably play in the financial industry of the future. 

 In a sense, technology per se is  nothing special  to financial institutions (as compared, for instance, to industrial companies) or to the finance function (as compared to other corporate functions, like logistics). However, in recent years, spurred by innovation and also regulation, banks and other financial institutions like hedge funds have evolved more and more into technology companies instead of being  just  financial intermediaries. Technology has become a major asset for almost any financial institution around the globe, having the potential to lead to competitive advantages as well as disadvantages. Some background information can shed light on the reasons for this development. 








 
 Technology Spending 

 Banks and financial institutions together form the industry that spends the most on technology on an annual basis. The following statement therefore shows not only that technology is important for the financial industry, but that the financial industry is also really important to the technology sector ( http://www.idc.com ): 
 
 …, financial services IT spending will reach almost $480 billion worldwide in 2016 with a five-year compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 4.2%. 
 IDC 
 

 In particular, banks and other financial institutions are engaging in a race to move their business and operating models on a digital basis ( http://www.statista.com ): 
 
 Bank spending on new technologies was predicted to amount to 19.9 billion U.S. dollars in 2017 in North America. 

 The banks develop current systems and work on new technological solutions in order to increase their competitiveness on the global market and to attract clients interested in new online and mobile technologies. It is a big opportunity for global Fintech companies which provide new ideas and software solutions for the banking industry. 
 Statista 
 

 Large, multinational banks today generally employ thousands of developers that maintain existing systems and build new ones. Large investment banks with heavy technological requirements show technology budgets often of several billion USD per year. 
 













 
 Technology as Enabler 

 The technological development has also contributed to innovations and efficiency improvements in the financial sector: 
 
 The financial services industry has seen drastic technology-led changes over the past few years. Many executives look to their IT departments to improve efficiency and facilitate game-changing innovation — while somehow also lowering costs and continuing to support legacy systems. Meanwhile, FinTech start-ups are encroaching upon established markets, leading with customer-friendly solutions developed from the ground up and unencumbered by legacy systems. 
 PwC 19th Annual Global CEO Survey 2016 
 

 As a side effect of the increasing efficiency, competitive advantages must often be looked for in ever more complex products or transactions. This in turn inherently increases risks and makes risk management as well as oversight and regulation more and more difficult. The financial crisis of 2007 and 2008 tells the story of potential dangers resulting from such developments. In a similar vein, “algorithms and computers gone wild” also represent a potential risk to the financial markets; this materialized dramatically in the so-called  flash crash  of May 2010, where automated selling led to large intraday drops in certain stocks and stock indices (see  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2010_Flash_Crash ). 
 













 
 Technology and Talent as Barriers to Entry 

 On the one hand, technology advances reduce cost over time,  ceteris paribus . On the other hand, financial institutions continue to invest heavily in technology to both gain market share and defend their current positions. To be active in certain areas in finance today often brings with it the need for large-scale investments in both technology and skilled staff. As an example, consider the derivatives analytics space: 
 
 Aggregated over the total software lifecycle, firms adopting in-house strategies for OTC [derivatives] pricing will require investments between $25 million and $36 million alone to build, maintain, and enhance a complete derivatives library. 
 Ding 2010 
 

 Not only is it costly and time-consuming to build a full-fledged derivatives analytics library, but you also need to have  enough experts  to do so. And these experts have to have the right tools and technologies available to accomplish their tasks. 

 Another quote about the early days of Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM), formerly one of the most respected quantitative hedge funds—which, however, went bust in the late 1990s—further supports this insight about technology and talent: 
 
 Meriwether spent $20 million on a state-of-the-art computer system and hired a crack team of financial engineers to run the show at LTCM, which set up shop in Greenwich, Connecticut. It was risk management on an industrial level. 
 Patterson 2010 
 

 The same computing power that Meriwether had to buy for millions of dollars is today probably available for thousands. On the other hand, trading, pricing, and risk management have become so complex for larger financial institutions that today they need to deploy IT infrastructures with tens of thousands of computing cores. 
 













 
 Ever-Increasing Speeds, Frequencies, Data Volumes 

 There is one dimension of the finance industry that has been influenced most by technological advances: the  speed  and  frequency  with which financial transactions are decided and executed. The recent book by Lewis (2014) describes so-called  flash trading —i.e., trading at the highest speeds possible—in vivid detail. 

 On the one hand, increasing data availability on ever-smaller scales makes it necessary to react in real time. On the other hand, the increasing speed and frequency of trading let the data volumes further increase. This leads to processes that reinforce each other and push the average time scale for financial transactions systematically down: 
 
 Renaissance’s Medallion fund gained an astonishing 80 percent in 2008, capitalizing on the market’s extreme volatility with its lightning-fast
computers. Jim Simons was the hedge fund world’s top earner for the year, pocketing a cool $2.5 billion. 
 Patterson 2010 
 

 Thirty years’ worth of daily stock price data for a single stock represents roughly 7,500 quotes. This kind of data is what most of today’s finance theory is based on. For example, theories like the modern portfolio theory (MPT), the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), and value-at-risk (VaR) all have their foundations in daily stock price data. 

 In comparison, on a typical trading day the stock price of Apple Inc. (AAPL) is quoted around 15,000 times—two times as many quotes as seen for end-of-day quoting over a time span of 30 years. This brings with it a number of challenges: 
 
 Data processing 
 
 It does not suffice to consider and process end-of-day quotes for stocks or other financial instruments; “too much” happens during the day for some instruments during 24 hours for 7 days a week. 
 
 Analytics speed 
 
 Decisions often have to be made in milliseconds or even faster, making it necessary to build the respective analytics capabilities and to analyze large amounts of data in real time. 
 
 Theoretical foundations 
 
 Although traditional finance theories and concepts are far from being perfect, they have been well tested (and sometimes well rejected) over time; for the millisecond scales important as of today, consistent concepts and theories that have proven to be somewhat robust over time are still missing. 
 
 

 All these challenges can in principle only be addressed by modern technology. Something that might also be a little bit surprising is that the lack of consistent theories often is addressed by technological approaches, in that high-speed algorithms exploit market microstructure elements (e.g., order flow, bid-ask spreads) rather than relying on some kind of financial reasoning. 
 













 
 The Rise of Real-Time Analytics 

 There is one discipline that has seen a strong increase in importance in the finance industry:  financial and data analytics . This phenomenon has a close relationship to the insight that speeds, frequencies, and data volumes increase at a rapid pace in the industry. In fact, real-time analytics can be considered the industry’s answer to this trend. 

 Roughly speaking, “financial and data analytics” refers to the discipline of applying software and technology in combination with (possibly advanced) algorithms and methods to gather, process, and analyze data in order to gain insights, to make decisions, or to fulfill regulatory requirements, for instance. Examples might include the estimation of sales impacts induced by a change in the pricing structure for a financial product in the retail branch of a bank. Another example might be the large-scale overnight calculation of credit value adjustments (CVA) for complex portfolios of derivatives trades of an investment bank. 

 There are two major challenges that financial institutions face in this context: 
 
 Big data 
 
 Banks and other financial institutions had to deal with massive amounts of data even before the term “big data” was coined; however, the amount of data that has to be processed during single analytics tasks has increased tremendously over time, demanding both increased computing power and ever-larger memory and storage capacities. 
 
 Real-time economy 
 
 In the past, decision makers could rely on structured, regular planning, decision, and (risk) management processes, whereas they today face the need to take care of these functions in real time; several tasks that have been taken care of in the past via overnight batch runs in the back office have now been moved to the front office and are executed in real time. 
 
 

 Again, one can observe an interplay between advances in technology and financial/business practice. On the one hand, there is the need to constantly improve analytics approaches in terms of speed and capability by applying modern technologies. On the other hand, advances on the technology side allow new analytics approaches that were considered impossible (or infeasible due to budget constraints) a couple of years or even months ago. 

 One major trend in the analytics space has been the utilization of parallel architectures on the CPU (central processing unit) side and massively parallel architectures on the GPGPU (general-purpose graphical processing units) side. Current GPGPUs often have more than 1,000 computing cores, making necessary a sometimes radical rethinking of what parallelism might mean to different algorithms. What is still an obstacle in this regard is that users generally have to learn new paradigms and techniques to harness the power of such hardware. 3 
 





 













 
 Python for Finance 

 The previous section describes some selected aspects characterizing the role of technology in finance: 

 
 
 Costs for technology in the finance industry 
 
 
 Technology as an enabler for new business and innovation 
 
 
 Technology and talent as barriers to entry in the finance industry 
 
 
 Increasing speeds, frequencies, and data volumes 
 
 
 The rise of real-time analytics 
 
 

 In this section, we want to analyze how Python can help in addressing several of the challenges implied by these aspects. But first, on a more fundamental level, let us examine Python for finance from a language and syntax standpoint. 








 
 Finance and Python Syntax 

 Most people who make their first steps with Python in a finance context may attack an algorithmic problem. This is similar to a scientist who, for example, wants to solve a differential equation, wants to evaluate an integral, or simply wants to visualize some data. In general, at this stage, there is only little thought spent on topics like a formal development process, testing, documentation, or deployment. However, this especially seems to be the stage when people fall in love with Python. A major reason for this might be that the Python syntax is generally quite close to the mathematical syntax used to describe scientific problems or financial algorithms. 

 We can illustrate this phenomenon by a simple financial algorithm, namely the valuation of a European call option by Monte Carlo simulation. We will consider a Black-Scholes-Merton (BSM) setup (see also [Link to Come]) in which the option’s underlying risk factor follows a geometric Brownian motion. 

 Suppose we have the following numerical  parameter values  for the valuation: 

 
 
 Initial stock index level  
   
     S   0   
     = 
     100 
   
 
 
 
 Strike price of the European call option  
   
     K 
     = 
     105 
   
 
 
 
 Time-to-maturity  
   
     T 
     = 
     1 
   
  year 
 
 
 Constant, riskless short rate  
   
     r 
     = 
     0 
     . 
     05 
   
 
 
 
 Constant volatility  
   
     σ 
     = 
     0 
     . 
     2 
   
 
 
 

 In the BSM model, the index level at maturity is a random variable, given by  Equation 1-1  with  z  being a standard normally distributed random variable. 
 
 Equation 1-1.  Black-Scholes-Merton (1973) index level at maturity 
 
   
     S   T   
     = 
     S   0   
     exp 
     
       
         r 
         - 
         1   2 
         σ   2   
       
       T 
       + 
       σ 
       
         T 
       
       z 
     
   
 
 

 The following is an  algorithmic description  of the Monte Carlo valuation procedure: 
 
 
 Draw  
   I 
  (pseudo)random numbers  
   
     z 
     ( 
     i 
     ) 
     , 
     i 
     
     i 
     n 
     { 
     1 
     , 
     2 
     , 
     . 
     . 
     . 
     , 
     I 
     } 
   
 , from the standard normal distribution. 
 
 
 Calculate all resulting index levels at maturity  
   
     S   T   
     
       ( 
       i 
       ) 
     
   
  for given  
   
     z 
     ( 
     i 
     ) 
   
  and  Equation 1-1 . 
 
 
 Calculate all inner values of the option at maturity as  
   
     h   T   
     
       ( 
       i 
       ) 
     
     = 
     max 
     
       ( 
       S   T   
       
         ( 
         i 
         ) 
       
       - 
       K 
       , 
       0 
       ) 
     
   
 . 
 
 
 Estimate the option present value via the Monte Carlo estimator given in  Equation 1-2 . 
 

 
 
 Equation 1-2.  Monte Carlo estimator for European option 
 
   
     C   0   
     ≈ 
     e   - r T   
     1   I 
     ∑   I   
     h   T   
     
       ( 
       i 
       ) 
     
   
 
 

 We are now going to translate this problem and algorithm into Python code. The reader might follow the single steps by using, for example,  IPython —this is, however, not really necessary at this stage. 

 In   [ 6 ] :   S0   =   100.    
          K   =   105.    
          T   =   1.0    
          r   =   0.05    
          sigma   =   0.2    
 
 In   [ 7 ] :   import   math 
          import   numpy   as   np    
 
          I   =   100000 
 
          np . random . seed ( 1000 )    
          z   =   np . random . standard_normal ( I )    
          ST   =   S0   *   np . exp ( ( r   -   sigma   * *   2   /   2 )   *   T   +   sigma   *   math . sqrt ( T )   *   z )    
          hT   =   np . maximum ( ST   -   K ,   0 )    
          C0   =   math . exp ( - r   *   T )   *   np . mean ( hT )    
 
 In   [ 8 ] :   print ( ' Value of the European Call Option  %5.3f : '   %   C0 )    
 
          Value   of   the   European   Call   Option   8.019 : 
 
 
 The model parameter values are defined. 
 
 NumPy  is used here as the main package. 
 
 The seed value for the randon number generator is fixed. 
 
 This draws standard normally distributed random numbers. 
 
 This simulates the end-of-period values. 
 
 The option payoffs at maturity are calculated. 
 
 The Monte Carlo estimator is evaluated. 
 
 This prints the resulting value estimate. 
 

 Three aspects are worth highlighting: 
 
 Syntax 
 
 The Python syntax is indeed quite close to the mathematical syntax, e.g., when it comes to the parameter value assignments. 
 
 Translation 
 
 Every mathematical and/or algorithmic statement can generally be translated into a  single  line of Python code. 
 
 Vectorization 
 
 One of the strengths of  NumPy  is the compact, vectorized syntax, e.g., allowing for 100,000 calculations within a single line of code. 
 
 

 This code can be used in an interactive environment like  IPython . However, code that is meant to be reused regularly typically gets organized in so-called  modules  (or  scripts ), which are single Python (technicakky “text”) files with the suffix  .py . Such a module could in this case look like  Example 1-1  and could be saved as a file named  bsm_mcs_euro.py . 
 
 Example 1-1.  Monte Carlo valuation of European call option 

 # 
 # Monte Carlo valuation of European call option 
 # in Black-Scholes-Merton model 
 # bsm_mcs_euro.py 
 # 
 # Python for Finance 
 # (c) Dr. Yves J. Hilpisch 
 # 
 import   math 
 import   numpy   as   np 

 # Parameter Values 
 S0   =   100.    # initial index level 
 K   =   105.    # strike price 
 T   =   1.0    # time-to-maturity 
 r   =   0.05    # riskless short rate 
 sigma   =   0.2    # volatility 

 I   =   100000    # number of simulations 

 # Valuation Algorithm 
 z   =   np . random . standard_normal ( I )    # pseudorandom numbers 
 # index values at maturity 
 ST   =   S0   *   np . exp (( r   -   0.5   *   sigma   **   2 )   *   T   +   sigma   *   math . sqrt ( T )   *   z ) 
 hT   =   np . maximum ( ST   -   K ,   0 )    # inner values at maturity 
 C0   =   math . exp ( - r   *   T )   *   np . mean ( hT )    # Monte Carlo estimator 

 # Result Output 
 print ( 'Value of the European Call Option  %5.3f '   %   C0 ) 

 The rather simple algorithmic example in this subsection illustrates that Python, with its very syntax, is well suited to complement the classic duo of scientific languages, English and Mathematics. It seems that adding  Python  to the set of scientific languages makes it more well rounded. We have 

 
 
 English  for  writing, talking  about scientific and financial problems, etc. 
 
 
 Mathematics  for  concisely and exactly describing and modeling  abstract aspects, algorithms, complex quantities, etc. 
 
 
 Python  for  technically modeling and implementing  abstract aspects, algorithms, complex quantities, etc. 
 
 
 Mathematics and Python Syntax 
 There is hardly any programming language that comes as close to mathematical syntax as Python. Numerical algorithms are therefore simple to translate from the mathematical representation into the  Pythonic  implementation. This makes prototyping, development, and code maintenance in such areas quite efficient with Python. 
 

 In some areas, it is common practice to use  pseudocode  and therewith to introduce a fourth language family member. The role of pseudocode is to represent, for example, financial algorithms in a more technical fashion that is both still close to the mathematical representation and already quite close to the technical implementation. In addition to the algorithm itself, pseudocode takes into account how computers work in principle. 

 This practice generally has its cause in the fact that with most programming languages the technical implementation is quite “far away” from its formal, mathematical representation. The majority of programming languages make it necessary to include so many elements that are only technically required that it is hard to see the equivalence between the mathematics and the code. 

 Nowadays, Python is often used in a  pseudocode way  since its syntax is almost analogous to the mathematics and since the technical “overhead” is kept to a minimum. This is accomplished by a number of high-level concepts embodied in the language that not only have their advantages but also come in general with risks and/or other costs. However, it is safe to say that with Python you can, whenever the need arises, follow the same strict implementation and coding practices that other languages might require from the outset. In that sense, Python can provide the best of both worlds:  high-level abstraction  and  rigorous implementation . 
 













 
 Efficiency and Productivity Through Python 

 At a high level, benefits from using Python can be measured in three dimensions: 
 
 Efficiency 
 
 How can Python help in getting results faster, in saving costs, and in saving time? 
 
 Productivity 
 
 How can Python help in getting more done with the same resources (people, assets, etc.)? 
 
 Quality 
 
 What does Python allow us to do that we could not do with alternative technologies? 
 
 

 A discussion of these aspects can by nature not be exhaustive. However, it can highlight some arguments as a starting point. 










 
 Shorter time-to-results 

 A field where the efficiency of Python becomes quite obvious is interactive data analytics. This is a field that benefits strongly from such powerful tools as  IPython  and libraries like  pandas . 

 Consider a finance student, writing her master’s thesis and interested in S&P 500 index values. She wants to analyze historical index levels for, say, a few years to see how the volatility of the index has fluctuated over time. She wants to find evidence that volatility, in contrast to some typical model assumptions, fluctuates over time and is far from being constant. The results should also be visualized. She mainly has to do the following: 

 
 
 Retrieve index level data from the Web. 
 
 
 Calculate the annualized rolling standard deviation of the log returns (volatility). 
 
 
 Plot the index level data and the results. 
 
 

 These tasks are complex enough that not too long ago one would have considered them to be something for professional financial analysts. Today, even the finance student can easily cope with such problems. Let us see how exactly this works—without worrying about syntax details at this stage (everything is explained in detail in subsequent chapters). 

 In   [ 10 ] :   import   numpy   as   np    
           import   pandas   as   pd    
 
 In   [ 11 ] :   data   =   pd . read_csv ( ' http://hilpisch.com/tr_eikon_eod_data.csv ' , 
                             index_col = 0 ,   parse_dates = True )    
           data   =   pd . DataFrame ( data [ ' .SPX ' ] )    
           data . info ( )    
 
           < class   ' pandas . core . frame . DataFrame ' > 
           DatetimeIndex :   1972   entries ,   2010 - 01 - 04   to   2017 - 10 - 31 
           Data   columns   ( total   1   columns ) : 
           . SPX      1972   non - null   float64 
           dtypes :   float64 ( 1 ) 
           memory   usage :   30.8   KB 
 
 
 In   [ 12 ] :   data [ ' rets ' ]   =   np . log ( data   /   data . shift ( 1 ) )    
           data [ ' vola ' ]   =   data [ ' rets ' ] . rolling ( 252 ) . std ( )   *   np . sqrt ( 252 )    
 
 In   [ 13 ] :   data [ [ ' .SPX ' ,   ' vola ' ] ] . plot ( subplots = True ,   figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) ;    
           plt . savefig ( ' ../images/01_chapter/spx_volatility.png ' ) 
 
 
 This imports  NumPy  and  pandas . 
 
 read_csv  allows the retrievel of remotely stored data sets. 
 
 A sub-set of the data is picked. 
 
 This shows some meta-information about the data set. 
 
 The log returns are calculated in vectorized fashion (“no looping”). 
 
 The rolling, annzalized volatility is derived. 
 
 This line finally plots the two time series. 
 

 Figure 1-1  shows the graphical result of this brief interactive session. It can be considered almost amazing that a few lines of code suffice to implement three rather complex tasks typically encountered in financial analytics: data gathering, complex and repeated mathematical calculations, and visualization of results. This example illustrates that  pandas  makes working with whole time series almost as simple as doing mathematical operations on floating-point numbers. 

 
 
 Figure 1-1.  S&P 500 closing values and annualized volatility 
 

 Translated to a professional finance context, the example implies that financial analysts can—when applying the right Python tools and libraries, providing high-level abstraction—focus on their very domain and not on the technical intrinsicalities. Analysts can react faster, providing valuable insights almost in real time and making sure they are one step ahead of the competition. This example of  increased efficiency  can easily translate into measurable bottom-line effects. 
 













 
 Ensuring high performance 

 In general, it is accepted that Python has a rather concise syntax and that it is relatively efficient to code with. However, due to the very nature of Python being an interpreted language, the  prejudice  persists that Python generally is too slow for compute-intensive tasks in finance. Indeed, depending on the specific implementation approach, Python can be really slow. But it  does not have to be slow —it can be highly performing in almost any application area. In principle, one can distinguish at least three different strategies for better performance: 
 
 Paradigm 
 
 In general, many different ways can lead to the same result in Python, but with rather different performance characteristics; “simply” choosing the right way (e.g., a specific library) can improve results significantly. 
 
 Compiling 
 
 Nowadays, there are several performance libraries available that provide compiled versions of important functions or that compile Python code statically or dynamically (at runtime or call time) to machine code, which can be orders of magnitude faster; popular ones are  Cython  and  Numba . 
 
 Parallelization 
 
 Many computational tasks, in particular in finance, can strongly benefit from parallel execution; this is nothing special to Python but something that can easily be accomplished with it. 
 
 
 Performance Computing with Python 
 Python per se is not a high-performance computing technology. However, Python has developed into an ideal platform to access current performance technologies. In that sense, Python has become something like a  glue language for performance computing . 
 

 Later chapters illustrate all three techniques in detail. For the moment, we want to stick to a simple, but still realistic, example that touches upon all three techniques. 

 A quite common task in financial analytics is to evaluate complex mathematical expressions on large arrays of numbers. To this end, Python itself provides everything needed: 

 In   [ 14 ]:   loops   =   2500000 
          import   math 
          a   =   range ( 1 ,   loops ) 
          def   f ( x ): 
              return   3   *   math . log ( x )   +   math . cos ( x )   **   2 
          % timeit   r   =   [ f ( x )   for   x   in   a ] 

          1.52   s   ±   29.2   ms   per   loop   ( mean   ±   std .   dev .   of   7   runs ,   1   loop   each ) 

 The Python interpreter needs 1.5 seconds in this case to evaluate the function  f  2,500,000 times. 

 The same task can be implemented using  NumPy , which provides optimized (i.e.,  pre-compiled ), functions to handle such array-based operations: 

 In   [ 15 ]:   import   numpy   as   np 
          a   =   np . arange ( 1 ,   loops ) 
          % timeit   r   =   3   *   np . log ( a )   +   np . cos ( a )   **   2 

          83.3   ms   ±   1.16   ms   per   loop   ( mean   ±   std .   dev .   of   7   runs ,   10   loops   each ) 

 Using  NumPy  considerably reduces the execution time to 90 milliseconds. 

 However, there is even a library specifically dedicated to this kind of task. It is called  numexpr , for “numerical expressions.” It  compiles  the expression to improve upon the performance of  NumPy ’s general functionality by, for example, avoiding in-memory copies of arrays along the way: 

 In   [ 16 ]:   import   numexpr   as   ne 
          ne . set_num_threads ( 1 ) 
          f   =   '3 * log(a) + cos(a) ** 2' 
          % timeit   r   =   ne . evaluate ( f ) 

          78.2   ms   ±   4.08   ms   per   loop   ( mean   ±   std .   dev .   of   7   runs ,   10   loops   each ) 

 Using this more specialized approach further reduces execution time to 80 milliseconds. However,  numexpr  also has built-in capabilities to parallelize the execution of the respective operation. This allows us to use multiple threads of a CPU: 

 In   [ 17 ]:   ne . set_num_threads ( 4 ) 
          % timeit   r   =   ne . evaluate ( f ) 

          21.9   ms   ±   113   µ s   per   loop   ( mean   ±   std .   dev .   of   7   runs ,   10   loops   each ) 

 This brings execution time further down to some 25 milliseconds in this case, with four threads utilized. Overall, this is a performance improvement of more than 50 times. Note, in particular, that this kind of improvement is possible without altering the basic problem/algorithm and without knowing anything about compiling or parallelization issues. The capabilities are accessible from a high level even by nonexperts. However, one has to be aware, of course, of which capabilities and options exist. 

 The example shows that Python provides a number of options to make more out of existing resources—i.e., to  increase productivity . With the sequential approach, about 31 mn evaluations per second are accomplished, while the parallel approach allows for more than 100 mn evaluations per second—in this case simply by telling Python to use all available CPU threads instead of just one. 
 



 













 
 From Prototyping to Production 

 Efficiency in interactive analytics and performance when it comes to execution speed are certainly two benefits of Python to consider. Yet another major benefit of using Python for finance might at first sight seem a bit subtler; at second sight it might present itself as an important strategic factor. It is the possibility to use Python end to end, from  prototyping to production . 

 Today’s practice in financial institutions around the globe, when it comes to financial development processes, is often characterized by a separated, two-step process. On the one hand, there are the  quantitative analysts  (“quants”) responsible for model development and technical prototyping. They like to use tools and environments like  Matlab  and  R  that allow for rapid, interactive application development. At this stage of the development efforts, issues like performance, stability, exception management, separation of data access, and analytics, among others, are not that important. One is mainly looking for a proof of concept and/or a prototype that exhibits the main desired features of an algorithm or a whole application. 

 Once the prototype is finished, IT departments with their  developers  take over and are responsible for translating the existing  prototype code  into reliable, maintainable, and performant  production code . Typically, at this stage there is a paradigm shift in that languages like  C ++ or  Java  are now used to fulfill the requirements for production. Also, a formal development process with professional tools, version control, etc. is applied. 

 This two-step approach has a number of generally unintended consequences: 
 
 Inefficiencies 
 
 Prototype code is not reusable; algorithms have to be implemented twice; redundant efforts take time and resources. 
 
 Diverse skill sets 
 
 Different departments show different skill sets and use different languages to implement “the same things.” 
 
 Legacy code 
 
 Code is available and has to be maintained in different languages, often using different styles of implementation (e.g., from an architectural point of view). 
 
 

 Using Python, on the other hand, enables a  streamlined  end-to-end process from the first interactive prototyping steps to highly reliable and efficiently maintainable production code. The communication between different departments becomes easier. The training of the workforce is also more streamlined in that there is only one major language covering all areas of financial application building. It also avoids the inherent inefficiencies and redundancies when using different technologies in different steps of the development process. All in all, Python can provide a  consistent technological framework  for almost all tasks in financial application development and algorithm  implementation . 
 





 













 
 AI-First Finance 








 
 Data Availability 

 













 
 Machine & Deep Learning 

 













 
 Traditional vs. AI-First Finance 

 





 













 
 Conclusions 

 Python as a language—but much more so as an ecosystem—is an ideal technological framework for the financial industry. It is characterized by a number of benefits, like an elegant syntax, efficient development approaches, and usability for prototyping  and  production, among others. With its huge amount of available libraries and tools, Python seems to have answers to most questions raised by recent developments in the financial industry in terms of analytics, data volumes and frequency, compliance, and regulation, as well as technology itself. It has the potential to provide a  single, powerful, consistent framework  with which to streamline end-to-end development and production efforts even across larger financial institutions. 
 













 
 Further Reading 

 The following book, by the same author, covers many aspects only touched upon briefly in this chapter in considerable detail (e.g. derivatives analytics): 

 
 
 Hilpisch, Yves (2015):  Derivatives Analytics with Python . Wiley Finance, Chichester, England.  http://derivatives-analytics-with-python.com . 
 
 

 The quotes in this chapter are taken from the following resources: 

 
 
 Crosman, Penny (2013): “Top 8 Ways Banks Will Spend Their 2014 IT Budgets.”  Bank Technology News . 
 
 
 Deutsche Börse Group (2008): “The Global Derivatives Market—An Introduction.” White paper. 
 
 
 Ding, Cubillas (2010): “Optimizing the OTC Pricing and Valuation Infrastructure.”  Celent study . 
 
 
 Lewis, Michael (2014):  Flash Boys . W. W. Norton & Company, New York. 
 
 
 Patterson, Scott (2010):  The Quants.  Crown Business, New York. 
 
 
 







 1  Python, for example, is a major language used in the Master of Financial Engineering program at Baruch College of the City University of New York (see  http://mfe.baruch.cuny.edu ). 2  See  http://wiki.python.org/moin/BeginnersGuide , where you will find links to many valuable resources for both developers and nondevelopers getting started with Python. 3  [Link to Come] provides an example for the benefits of using modern GPGPUs in the context of the generation of random numbers. 
 
 



 
 
   
   
 Chapter 2.  Python Infrastructure 

 
 In building a house, there is the problem of the selection of wood. 

 It is essential that the carpenter’s aim be to carry equipment that will cut well and, when he has time, to sharpen that equipment. 
 Miyamoto Musashi (The Book of Five Rings) 
 






 
 Introduction 

 For someone new to Python, Python deployment might seem all but straightforward. The same holds true for the wealth of libraries and packages that can be installed optionally. First of all, there is not only  one  Python. Python comes in many different flavors, like CPython, Jython, IronPython or PyPy. Then there is still the divide between Python 2.7 and the 3.x world. 1  In what follows, the chapter focuses on  CPython , the by far most popular version of the Python programming language, and here on  version 3.6 . 

 Even when focusing on CPython 3.6 (henceforth just " Python “), deployment is made difficult due to a number of additional reasons: 

 
 
 the interpreter (a standard CPython installation) only comes with the so-called  standard library  (e.g. covering typical mathematical functions) 
 
 
 optional Python packages need to be installed separately — and there are hundreds of them 
 
 
 compiling/building such non-standard packages on your own can be tricky due to dependencies and operating system-specific requirements 
 
 
 taking care of such dependencies and of version consistency over time (i.e. maintenance) is often tedious and time consuming 
 
 
 updates and upgrades for certain packages might cause the need for re-compiling a multitude of other packages 
 
 
 changing or replacing one package might cause trouble in (many) other places 
 
 

 Fortunately, there are tools and strategies available that help with the Python deployment issue. This chapter covers the following types of technologies that help with Python deployment: 

 
 
 package manager : package managers like  pip  or  conda  help with the installing, updating and removing of Python packages; they also help with version consistency of different packages 
 
 
 virtual environment manager : a virtual environment manager like  virtualenv  or  conda  allows to manage multiple Python installations in parallel (e.g. to have both a Python 2.7 and 3.6 install on a single machine or to test the most recent development version of a fancy Python package without risk) 
 
 
 container :  Docker  containers represent complete file systems containing all pieces of a system needed to run a certain software, like code, runtime or system tools; for example, you can run an Ubuntu 16.04 operating system with a Python 3.6 install and the respective Python codes in a Docker container hosted on a machine running Mac OS or Windows 10, for example 
 
 
 cloud instance : deploying Python code for algorithmic trading generally requires high availability, security and also performance; these requirements can typically only be met by the use of professional compute and storage infrastructure that is nowadays available at attractive conditions in the form of fairly small to really large and powerful cloud instances; one benefit of a cloud instance, i.e. a virtual server, compared to a dedicated server rented longer term, is that users generally get charged only for the hours of actual usage; another advantage is that such cloud instances are available literally in a minute or two if needed which helps agile development and also with scalability 
 
 

 The structure of this chapter is as follows 
 
 “Conda as a Package Manager” 
 
 This section introduces  conda  as a package manager for Python. 
 
 “Conda as a Virtual Environment Manager” 
 
 This section focuses on  conda ’s capabilities as a virtual environment manager. 
 
 “Using Docker Containerization” 
 
 This section gives a brief overview of Docker as a containerization technology and focuses on the building of a Ubuntu-based container with Python 3.6 installation. 
 
 “Using Cloud Instances” 
 
 The section shows how to deploy Python and Jupyter Notebook — as a powerful, browser-based tool suite — for Python development in the cloud. 
 
 

 The goal of this chapter is to have a proper Python installation with the most important numerical and data analysis packages available on a professional infrastructure. This combination then serves as the backbone for implementing and deploying the Python codes in later chapter, be it interactive financial analytics code or code in the form of scripts and modules. 
 













 
 Conda as a Package Manager 

 Although  conda  can be installed stand alone, an efficient way of doing it is via Miniconda, a minimal Python distribution including  conda  as a package and virtual environment manager. 








 
 Installing Miniconda 3.6 

 You can download the different versions of Miniconda on the  Miniconda page . In what follows, the Python 3.6 64-bit version is assumed which is available for Linux, Windows and Mac OS. The main example in this sub-section is a session in a Ubuntu-based Docker container which downloads the Linux 64-bit installer via  wget  and then installs Miniconda. The code as shown should work without modification on any other Linux-based or Mac OS-based machine as well. 

 $ docker run -ti -h py4fi -p 9999:9999 ubuntu:latest /bin/bash

root@py4fi:/# apt-get update; apt-get upgrade -y
...
root@py4fi:/# apt-get install wget bzip2 gcc
...
root@py4fi:/# wget https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
--2017-11-04 10:52:09--  https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
Resolving repo.continuum.io (repo.continuum.io)... 104.16.19.10, 104.16.18.10, 2400:cb00:2048:1::6810:120a, ...
Connecting to repo.continuum.io (repo.continuum.io)|104.16.19.10|:443... connected.
HTTP request sent, awaiting response... 200 OK
Length: 54167345 (52M) [application/x-sh]
Saving to: 'Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh'

Miniconda3-latest-Lin 100%[=======================>]  51.66M  1.57MB/s    in 32s

2017-11-04 10:52:41 (1.62 MB/s) - 'Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh' saved [54167345/54167345]

root@py4fi:/# bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

Welcome to Miniconda3 4.3.30

In order to continue the installation process, please review the license
agreement.
Please, press ENTER to continue
>>> 

 Simply pressing the  ENTER  key starts the installation process. After reviewing the license agreement, approve the terms by answering  yes . 

 Do you approve the license terms? [yes|no]
>>> yes

Miniconda3 will now be installed into this location:
/root/miniconda3

  - Press ENTER to confirm the location
  - Press CTRL-C to abort the installation
  - Or specify a different location below

[/root/miniconda3] >>>
PREFIX=/root/miniconda3
installing: python-3.6.3-hc9025b9_1 ...
Python 3.6.3 :: Anaconda, Inc.
installing: ca-certificates-2017.08.26-h1d4fec5_0 ...
installing: conda-env-2.6.0-h36134e3_1 ...
installing: libgcc-ng-7.2.0-h7cc24e2_2 ...
installing: libstdcxx-ng-7.2.0-h7a57d05_2 ...
installing: libffi-3.2.1-h4deb6c0_3 ...
installing: ncurses-6.0-h06874d7_1 ...
installing: openssl-1.0.2l-h077ae2c_5 ...
installing: tk-8.6.7-h5979e9b_1 ...
installing: xz-5.2.3-h2bcbf08_1 ...
installing: yaml-0.1.7-h96e3832_1 ...
installing: zlib-1.2.11-hfbfcf68_1 ...
installing: libedit-3.1-heed3624_0 ...
installing: readline-7.0-hac23ff0_3 ...
installing: sqlite-3.20.1-h6d8b0f3_1 ...
installing: asn1crypto-0.22.0-py36h265ca7c_1 ...
installing: certifi-2017.7.27.1-py36h8b7b77e_0 ...
installing: chardet-3.0.4-py36h0f667ec_1 ...
installing: idna-2.6-py36h82fb2a8_1 ...
installing: pycosat-0.6.2-py36h1a0ea17_1 ...
installing: pycparser-2.18-py36hf9f622e_1 ...
installing: pysocks-1.6.7-py36hd97a5b1_1 ...
installing: ruamel_yaml-0.11.14-py36ha2fb22d_2 ...
installing: six-1.10.0-py36hcac75e4_1 ...
installing: cffi-1.10.0-py36had8d393_1 ...
installing: setuptools-36.5.0-py36he42e2e1_0 ...
installing: cryptography-2.0.3-py36ha225213_1 ...
installing: wheel-0.29.0-py36he7f4e38_1 ...
installing: pip-9.0.1-py36h8ec8b28_3 ...
installing: pyopenssl-17.2.0-py36h5cc804b_0 ...
installing: urllib3-1.22-py36hbe7ace6_0 ...
installing: requests-2.18.4-py36he2e5f8d_1 ...
installing: conda-4.3.30-py36h5d9f9f4_0 ...
installation finished. 

 After you have agreed to the licensing terms and have confirmed the install location you should allow Miniconda to prepend the new Miniconda install location to the  PATH  environment variable by answering  yes  once again. 

 Do you wish the installer to prepend the Miniconda3 install location
to PATH in your /root/.bashrc ? [yes|no]
[no] >>> yes 

 After this rather simple installation procedure, there are now both a basic Python install as well as  conda  available. The basic Python install comes already with some nice batteries included like the  SQLite3  database engine. You might try out whether you can start Python in a  new shell instance  or after  appending the relevant path  to the respective environment variable. 

 root@py4fi:/# export PATH="/root/miniconda3/bin/:$PATH"
root@py4fi:/# python
Python 3.6.3 |Anaconda, Inc.| (default, Oct 13 2017, 12:02:49)
[GCC 7.2.0] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> print('Hello Algo Trading World.')
Hello Algo Trading World.
>>> exit()
root@py4fi:/# 
 













 
 Basic Operations with Conda 

 Conda  can be used to efficiently handle, among others, the installing, updating and removing of Python packages. The following list provides an overview of the major functions. 
 
 installing Python x.x 
 
 conda install python=x.x 
 
 updating Python 
 
 conda update python 
 
 installing a package 
 
 conda install $PACKAGE_NAME 
 
 updating a package 
 
 conda update $PACKAGE_NAME 
 
 removing a package 
 
 conda remove $PACKAGE_NAME 
 
 updating conda itself 
 
 conda update conda 
 
 searching for packages 
 
 conda search $SEARCH_TERM 
 
 listing installed packages 
 
 conda list 
 
 

 Given these capabilities, installing, for example,  NumPy  — as one of the most important libraries of the so-called scientific stack — is a single command only. When the installation takes place on a machine with Intel processor, the procedure automatically installs the  Intel Math Kernel Library  mkl  which speeds up numerical operations not only for  NumPy  on Intel machines but also for a few other scientific Python packages. 

 root@py4fi:/# conda install numpy
Fetching package metadata ...........
Solving package specifications: .

Package plan for installation in environment /root/miniconda3:

The following NEW packages will be INSTALLED:

    intel-openmp: 2018.0.0-h15fc484_7
    mkl:          2018.0.0-hb491cac_4
    numpy:        1.13.3-py36ha12f23b_0

Proceed ([y]/n)? y

intel-openmp-2 100% |######################################| Time: 0:00:00   1.78 MB/s
mkl-2018.0.0-h 100% |######################################| Time: 0:01:27   2.08 MB/s
numpy-1.13.3-p 100% |######################################| Time: 0:00:02   1.36 MB/s
root@py4fi:/# 

 Multiple packages can also be installed at once. The  -y  flag indicates that all (potential) questions shall be answered with  yes . 

 conda install -y ipython matplotlib pandas pytables scipy seaborn 

 After the resulting installation procedure, some of the most important libraries for financial analytics are available in addition to the standard ones. 
 
 IPython 
 
 an improved interactive Python shell 
 
 matplotlib 
 
 the standard plotting library in Python 
 
 NumPy 
 
 efficient handling of numerical arrays 
 
 pandas 
 
 management of tabular data, like financial time series data 
 
 PyTables 
 
 a Python wrapper for the  HDF5  library 
 
 SciPy 
 
 a collection of scientific classes and functions (installed as a dependency) 
 
 Seaborn 
 
 a plotting library adding statistical capabilities and nice plotting defaults 
 
 

 This provides a basic tool set for data analysis in general and financial analytics in particular. The next example uses  IPython  and draws a set of pseudo-random numbers with  NumPy . 

 root @py4fi : / # ipython 
 Python   3.6 . 3   | Anaconda ,   Inc .|   ( default ,   Oct   13   2017 ,   12 : 02 : 49 ) 
 Type   'copyright' ,   'credits'   or   'license'   for   more   information 
 IPython   6.1 . 0   --   An   enhanced   Interactive   Python .   Type   '?'   for   help . 

 In   [ 1 ]:   import   numpy   as   np 

 In   [ 2 ]:   np . random . standard_normal (( 5 ,   4 )) 
 Out [ 2 ]: 
 array ([[ - 0.11906643 ,    0.65717731 ,    0.3763829   ,    0.04928928 ], 
        [ - 0.88728758 ,   - 0.41263027 ,   - 0.70284906 ,   - 0.42948971 ], 
        [ - 0.43964908 ,   - 0.21453161 ,    0.63860994 ,   - 0.24972815 ], 
        [ - 0.50119552 ,   - 0.68807591 ,   - 0.03928424 ,    3.03200697 ], 
        [ - 0.19549982 ,    0.92946315 ,   - 1.86523627 ,    0.37608079 ]]) 
 In   [ 3 ]:   exit 
 root @py4fi : / # 

 Executing  conda list  verifies which packages are installed. 

 root@py4fi:/# conda list
# packages in environment at /root/miniconda3:
#
asn1crypto                0.22.0           py36h265ca7c_1
bzip2                     1.0.6                h0376d23_1
ca-certificates           2017.08.26           h1d4fec5_0
certifi                   2017.7.27.1      py36h8b7b77e_0
cffi                      1.10.0           py36had8d393_1
chardet                   3.0.4            py36h0f667ec_1
conda                     4.3.30           py36h5d9f9f4_0
conda-env                 2.6.0                h36134e3_1
cryptography              2.0.3            py36ha225213_1
cycler                    0.10.0           py36h93f1223_0
...
matplotlib                2.1.0            py36hba5de38_0
mkl                       2018.0.0             hb491cac_4
ncurses                   6.0                  h06874d7_1
numexpr                   2.6.2            py36hdd3393f_1
numpy                     1.13.3           py36ha12f23b_0
openssl                   1.0.2l               h077ae2c_5
pandas                    0.20.3           py36h842e28d_2
...
python                    3.6.3                hc9025b9_1
python-dateutil           2.6.1            py36h88d3b88_1
pytz                      2017.2           py36hc2ccc2a_1
qt                        5.6.2               h974d657_12
readline                  7.0                  hac23ff0_3
requests                  2.18.4           py36he2e5f8d_1
ruamel_yaml               0.11.14          py36ha2fb22d_2
scipy                     0.19.1           py36h9976243_3
seaborn                   0.8.0            py36h197244f_0
setuptools                36.5.0           py36he42e2e1_0
simplegeneric             0.8.1            py36h2cb9092_0
sip                       4.18.1           py36h51ed4ed_2
six                       1.10.0           py36hcac75e4_1
sqlite                    3.20.1               h6d8b0f3_1
statsmodels               0.8.0            py36h8533d0b_0
tk                        8.6.7                h5979e9b_1
tornado                   4.5.2            py36h1283b2a_0
traitlets                 4.3.2            py36h674d592_0
urllib3                   1.22             py36hbe7ace6_0
wcwidth                   0.1.7            py36hdf4376a_0
wheel                     0.29.0           py36he7f4e38_1
xz                        5.2.3                h2bcbf08_1
yaml                      0.1.7                h96e3832_1
zlib                      1.2.11               hfbfcf68_1
root@py4fi:/# 

 In case a package is not needed anymore, it is efficiently removed with  conda remove . 

 root@py4fi:/# conda remove seaborn
Fetching package metadata ...........
Solving package specifications: .

Package plan for package removal in environment /root/miniconda3:

The following packages will be REMOVED:

    seaborn: 0.8.0-py36h197244f_0

Proceed ([y]/n)? y

root@py4fi:/# 

 conda  as a package manager is already quite useful. However, its full power only becomes evident when adding virtual environment management to the mix. 
 Tip 
 conda  as a package manager makes installing, updating and removing of Python packages a pleasant experience. There is no need to take care of building and compiling packages on your own anymore — which can be tricky sometimes given the list of dependencies a package specifies and given the specifics to be considered on different operating systems. 
 
 





 













 
 Conda as a Virtual Environment Manager 

 Having installed Miniconda with  conda  included provides a default Python installation depending on what version of Miniconda has been chosen. The virtual environment management capabilities of  conda  allow, for example, to add to a Python 3.6 default installation a completely separated installation of Python 2.7.x. To this end,  conda  offers the following functionality. 
 
 creating a virtual environment 
 
 conda create --name $ENVIRONMENT_NAME 
 
 activating an environment 
 
 source activate $ENVIRONMENT_NAME 
 
 deactivating an environment 
 
 source deactivate $ENVIRONMENT_NAME 
 
 removing an environment 
 
 conda-env remove --name $ENVIRONMENT_NAME 
 
 export to an environment file 
 
 conda env export > $FILE_NAME 
 
 creating an environment from file 
 
 conda env create -f $FILE_NAME 
 
 listing all environments 
 
 conda info --envs 
 
 

 As a simple illustration, the example code that follows creates an environment called  py27 , installs  IPython  and executes a line of Python 2.7.x code. 

 root@py4fi:/# conda create --name py27 python=2.7
Fetching package metadata ...........
Solving package specifications: .

Package plan for installation in environment /root/miniconda3/envs/py27:

The following NEW packages will be INSTALLED:

    ca-certificates: 2017.08.26-h1d4fec5_0
    certifi:         2017.7.27.1-py27h9ceb091_0
    libedit:         3.1-heed3624_0
    libffi:          3.2.1-h4deb6c0_3
    libgcc-ng:       7.2.0-h7cc24e2_2
    libstdcxx-ng:    7.2.0-h7a57d05_2
    ncurses:         6.0-h06874d7_1
    openssl:         1.0.2l-h077ae2c_5
    pip:             9.0.1-py27ha730c48_4
    python:          2.7.14-h89e7a4a_22
    readline:        7.0-hac23ff0_3
    setuptools:      36.5.0-py27h68b189e_0
    sqlite:          3.20.1-h6d8b0f3_1
    tk:              8.6.7-h5979e9b_1
    wheel:           0.29.0-py27h411dd7b_1
    zlib:            1.2.11-hfbfcf68_1

Proceed ([y]/n)? y

Fetching package metadata ...........
Solving package specifications: .

...

#
# To activate this environment, use:
# > source activate py27
#
# To deactivate an active environment, use:
# > source deactivate
#

root@py4fi:/# 

 Notice how the prompt changes to include  (py27)  after the activation of the environment. 2 

 root@py4fi:/# source activate py27
(py27) root@py4fi:/# conda install -y ipython
Fetching package metadata ...........
Solving package specifications: .

... 

 Finally, using  IPython  with Python 2.7 syntax. 

 (py27) root@py4fi:/# ipython
Python 2.7.14 |Anaconda, Inc.| (default, Oct 27 2017, 18:21:12)
Type "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.

IPython 5.4.1 -- An enhanced Interactive Python.
?         -> Introduction and overview of IPython's features.
%quickref -> Quick reference.
help      -> Python's own help system.
object?   -> Details about 'object', use 'object??' for extra details.

In [1]: print "Hello Algo Trading World!"
Hello Algo Trading World!

In [2]: exit
(py27) root@py4fi:/# 

 As this example demonstrates,  conda  as a virtual environment manager allows to install different Python versions alongside each other. It also allows to install different versions of certain packages. The default Python install is not influenced by such a procedure, nor are other environments which might exist on the same machine. All available environments can be shown via  conda info --envs . 

 (py27) root@py4fi:/# conda info --envs
# conda environments:
#
py27                  *  /root/miniconda3/envs/py27
root                     /root/miniconda3

(py27) root@py4fi:/# 

 Sometimes it is necessary to share environment information with others or to use environment information on multiple machines, for instance. To this end, one can export the installed packages list to a file with  conda env export . 

 (py27) root@py4fi:/# conda env export > py27env.yml
(py27) root@py4fi:/# cat py27env.yml
name: py27
channels:
- defaults
dependencies:
- backports=1.0=py27h63c9359_1
- backports.shutil_get_terminal_size=1.0.0=py27h5bc021e_2
- ca-certificates=2017.08.26=h1d4fec5_0
- certifi=2017.7.27.1=py27h9ceb091_0
- decorator=4.1.2=py27h1544723_0
- enum34=1.1.6=py27h99a27e9_1
- ipython=5.4.1=py27h36c99b6_1
- ipython_genutils=0.2.0=py27h89fb69b_0
- libedit=3.1=heed3624_0
- libffi=3.2.1=h4deb6c0_3
- libgcc-ng=7.2.0=h7cc24e2_2
- libstdcxx-ng=7.2.0=h7a57d05_2
- ncurses=6.0=h06874d7_1
- openssl=1.0.2l=h077ae2c_5
- pathlib2=2.3.0=py27h6e9d198_0
- pexpect=4.2.1=py27hcf82287_0
- pickleshare=0.7.4=py27h09770e1_0
- pip=9.0.1=py27ha730c48_4
- prompt_toolkit=1.0.15=py27h1b593e1_0
- ptyprocess=0.5.2=py27h4ccb14c_0
- pygments=2.2.0=py27h4a8b6f5_0
- python=2.7.14=h89e7a4a_22
- readline=7.0=hac23ff0_3
- scandir=1.6=py27hf7388dc_0
- setuptools=36.5.0=py27h68b189e_0
- simplegeneric=0.8.1=py27h19e43cd_0
- six=1.11.0=py27h5f960f1_1
- sqlite=3.20.1=h6d8b0f3_1
- tk=8.6.7=h5979e9b_1
- traitlets=4.3.2=py27hd6ce930_0
- wcwidth=0.1.7=py27h9e3e1ab_0
- wheel=0.29.0=py27h411dd7b_1
- zlib=1.2.11=hfbfcf68_1
- pip:
  - backports.shutil-get-terminal-size==1.0.0
  - ipython-genutils==0.2.0
  - prompt-toolkit==1.0.15
prefix: /root/miniconda3/envs/py27

(py27) root@py4fi:/# 

 Often, virtual environments, which are technically not that much more than a certain (sub-)folder structure, are created to do some quick tests. 3  In such a case, an environment is easily removed after deactivation via  conda env remove . 

 (py27) root@py4fi:/# source deactivate
root@py4fi:/# conda env remove --name py27

Package plan for package removal in environment /root/miniconda3/envs/py27:

The following packages will be REMOVED:

    backports:                          1.0-py27h63c9359_1
    backports.shutil_get_terminal_size: 1.0.0-py27h5bc021e_2
    ca-certificates:                    2017.08.26-h1d4fec5_0
    certifi:                            2017.7.27.1-py27h9ceb091_0
    ...
    traitlets:                          4.3.2-py27hd6ce930_0
    wcwidth:                            0.1.7-py27h9e3e1ab_0
    wheel:                              0.29.0-py27h411dd7b_1
    zlib:                               1.2.11-hfbfcf68_1

Proceed ([y]/n)? y
                                                                           # 

 This concludes the overview of  conda  as a virtual environment manager. 
 Tip 
 conda  does not only help with managing packages, it is also a virtual environment manager for Python. It simplifies the creation of different Python environments, allowing to have multiple versions of Python and optional packages available on the same machine without them influencing each other in any way.  conda  also allows to export environment information to easily replicate it on multiple machines or to share it with others. 
 
 













 
 Using Docker Containerization 

 Docker containers have taken over the IT world by storm. Although the technology is still quite young, it has established itself as one of the benchmarks for the efficient development and deployment of almost any kind of software application. 

 For our purposes it suffices to think of a Docker container as a separated (“containerized”) file system that includes an operating system (e.g. Ubuntu 16.04. for server), a (Python) runtime, additional system and development tools as well as further (Python) libraries and packages as needed. Such a Docker container might run on a local machine with Windows 10 or on a cloud instance with a Linux operating system, for instance. 

 This section does not allow to go into the exciting details of Docker containers. It is rather a concise illustration of what the Docker technology can do in the context of Python deployment. 4 








 
 Docker Images and Containers 

 However, before moving on to the illustration, two fundamental terms need to be distinguished when talking about Docker. The first is a  Docker image  which can be compared to a Python class. The second is a  Docker container  which can be compared to an instance of the respective Python class. 

 On a more technical level, you find the following definition for a  Docker image  in the  Docker glossary : 
 
 Docker images are the basis of containers. An Image is an ordered collection of root filesystem changes and the corresponding execution parameters for use within a container runtime. An image typically contains a union of layered filesystems stacked on top of each other. An image does not have state and it never changes. 

 Similarly, you find the following definition for a  Docker container  in the  Docker glossary  which makes the analogy to Python classes and instances of such classes transparent: 
 
 A container is a runtime instance of a Docker image. A Docker container consists of: a Docker image, an execution environment and a standard set of instructions. 

 Depending on the operating system, the installation of Docker is somewhat different. That is why this section does not go into the respective details. Detailed information is found on the  Install Docker Engine page . 
 













 
 Building an Ubuntu & Python Docker Image 

 This sub-section illustrates the building of a Docker image based on the latest version of Ubuntu that includes Miniconda as well as a few important Python packages. In addition, it also does some Linux housekeeping by updating the Linux packages index, upgrading packages if required and installing certain, additional system tools. To this end, two scripts are needed. One is a  bash  script doing all the work on the Linux level. 5  The other is a so-called  Dockerfile  which controls the building procedure for the image itself. 

 The  bash  script in  Example 2-1  which does the installing consists of three major parts. The first part handles the Linux housekeeping. The second part installs Miniconda while the third part installs optional Python packages. There are also more detailed comments inline. 
 
 Example 2-1.  Script installing Python and optional packages 

 #!/bin/bash 
 # 
 # Script to Install 
 # Linux System Tools and 
 # Basic Python Components 
 # 
 # Python for Finance 
 # (c) Dr. Yves J. Hilpisch 
 # 
 # GENERAL LINUX 
apt-get update   # updates the package index cache 
apt-get upgrade -y   # updates packages 
 # installs system tools 
apt-get install -y bzip2 gcc git htop screen vim wget
apt-get upgrade -y bash   # upgrades bash if necessary 
apt-get clean   # cleans up the package index cache 

 # INSTALL MINICONDA 
 # downloads Miniconda 
wget https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh -O Miniconda.sh
bash Miniconda.sh -b   # installs it 
rm -rf Miniconda.sh   # removes the installer 
 export  PATH = "/root/miniconda3/bin: $PATH "    # prepends the new path 

 # INSTALL PYTHON LIBRARIES 
conda install -y pandas   # installs pandas 
conda install -y ipython   # installs IPython shell 

 The  Dockerfile  in  Example 2-2  uses the  bash  script in  Example 2-1  to build a new Docker image. It also has its major parts commented inline. 
 
 Example 2-2.  Dockerfile to build the image 

 #
# Building a Docker Image with
# the Latest Ubuntu Version and
# Basic Python Install
#
# Python for Finance
# (c) Dr. Yves J. Hilpisch
#

# latest Ubuntu version
FROM ubuntu:latest

# information about maintainer
MAINTAINER yves

# add the bash script
ADD install.sh /
# change rights for the script
RUN chmod u+x /install.sh
# run the bash script
RUN /install.sh
# prepend the new path
ENV PATH /root/miniconda3/bin:$PATH

# execute IPython when container is run
CMD ["ipython"] 

 If these two files are in a single folder and Docker is installed, then the building of the new Docker image is straightforward. Here, the tag  ubuntupython  is used for the image. This tag is needed to reference the image, for example, when running a container based on it. 

 macbookpro:~/Docker$ docker build -t py4fi:basic .
Sending build context to Docker daemon   29.7kB
Step 1/7 : FROM ubuntu:latest
 ---> 747cb2d60bbe

...

Step 7/7 : CMD ["ipython"]
 ---> Running in fddb07301003
Removing intermediate container fddb07301003
 ---> 60a180c9cfa6
Successfully built 60a180c9cfa6
Successfully tagged py4fi:basic
macbookpro:~/Docker$ 

 Existing Docker images can be listed via  docker images . The new image should be on top of the list. 

 macbookpro:~/Docker$ docker images
REPOSITORY          TAG                 IMAGE ID            CREATED              SIZE
py4fi               basic               60a180c9cfa6        About a minute ago   1.65GB
ubuntu              python              9fa4649d110f        4 days ago           2.46GB
<none>              <none>              5ac1e7b7bd9f        4 days ago           2.46GB
ubuntu              base                bcee12a18154        6 days ago           2.29GB
<none>              <none>              032acb2af94c        6 days ago           122MB
tpq                 python              a9dc75f040f6        12 days ago          2.55GB
ubuntu              latest              747cb2d60bbe        3 weeks ago          122MB
macbookpro:~/Docker$ 

 Having built the  ubuntupython  image successfully allows to run a respective Docker container with  docker run . The parameter combination  -ti  is needed for interactive processes running within a Docker container, like a shell process (see the  Docker Run Reference page ). 

 macbookpro:~/Docker$ docker run -ti py4fi:basic

Python 3.6.3 |Anaconda, Inc.| (default, Oct 13 2017, 12:02:49)
Type 'copyright', 'credits' or 'license' for more information
IPython 6.1.0 -- An enhanced Interactive Python. Type '?' for help.

In [1]: import numpy as np

In [2]: a = np.random.standard_normal((5, 3))

In [3]: import pandas as pd

In [4]: df = pd.DataFrame(a, columns=['a', 'b', 'c'])

In [5]: df
Out[5]:
          a         b         c
0  0.062129  0.040233  0.494589
1 -0.681517 -0.307187 -0.476016
2  0.861527  0.438467 -1.656811
3 -1.402893  0.611978  0.238889
4  0.876606  0.746728  0.840246

In [6]: 

 Exiting  IPython  will exit the container as well since it is  the only  application run within the container. However, you can detach from a container via 

 Ctrl+p --> Ctrl+q 

 After having detached from the container, the  docker ps  command shows the running container (and maybe other currently running containers): 

 macbookpro:~/Dropbox/Platform/algobox/algobook/book/code/Docker$ docker ps
CONTAINER ID        IMAGE               COMMAND             CREATED             STATUS              PORTS                    NAMES
98b95440f962        py4fi:basic         "ipython"           3 minutes ago       Up 3 minutes                                 wonderful_neumann
4b85dfc94780        ubuntu:latest       "/bin/bash"         About an hour ago   Up About an hour    0.0.0.0:9999->9999/tcp   musing_einstein
macbookpro:~/Docker$ 

 Attaching to the Docker container is accomplished by  docker attach $CONTAINER_ID  (notice that a few letters of the  CONTAINER ID  are enough): 

 macbookpro:~/Docker$ docker attach 98b95
In [6]: df.info()
<class 'pandas.core.frame.DataFrame'>
RangeIndex: 5 entries, 0 to 4
Data columns (total 3 columns):
a    5 non-null float64
b    5 non-null float64
c    5 non-null float64
dtypes: float64(3)
memory usage: 200.0 bytes

In [7]: exit
macbookpro:~/Docker$ 

 The  exit  command terminates  IPython  and therewith the Docker container as well. It can be removed by  docker rm . 

 macbookpro:~/Docker$ docker rm 98b95
d9efb
macbookpro:~/Docker$ 

 Similarly, the Docker image  ubuntupython  can be removed via  docker rmi  if not needed any longer. While containers are relatively light weight, single images might consume quite a bit of storage. In the case of the  py4fi:basic  image, the size is above 1 GB. That is why you might want to regularly clean up the list of Docker images. 

 macbookpro:~/Docker$ docker rmi 60a180 

 Of course, there is much more to say about Docker containers and their benefits in certain application scenarios. For the purposes of this book and online training course, they provide a modern approach to deploy Python, to do Python development in a completely separated (containerized) environment and to ship codes for algorithmic trading. 
 Tip 
 If you are not yet using Docker containers, you should consider start using them. They provide a number of benefits when it comes to Python deployment and development efforts, not only when working locally but in particular when working with remote cloud instances and servers deploying code for algorithmic trading. 
 
 





 













 
 Using Cloud Instances 

 This section shows how to set up a full-fledged Python infrastructure on a  DigitalOcean  cloud instance. There are many other cloud providers out there, among them  Amazon Web Services  (AWS) as the leading provider. However, DigitalOcean is well known for its simplicity and also its relatively low rates for their smaller cloud instances, which they call  droplet . The smallest droplet, which is generally sufficient for exploration and development purposes, only costs 5 USD per month or 0.007 USD per hour. Users get only charged by the hour so that you can easily spin up a droplet for 2 hours, destroy it afterwards and get charged just 0.014 USD. If you do not have an account yet, register for one on this  sign-up page  that secures you a starting credit of 10 USD. 

 The goal of this section is to set up a droplet on DigitalOcean that has a Python 3.6 installation plus typically needed packages (e.g.  NumPy ,  pandas ) in combination with a password-protected and Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)-encrypted  Jupyter Notebook  server installation. As a web-based tool suite, Jupyter Notebook provides three major tools that can be used via a regular browser: 

 
 
 Jupyter Notebook : this is the by now really popular interactive development environment that features a selection of different language kernels like for Python, R and Julia 
 
 
 terminal : a system shell implementation accessible via the browser which allows for all typical system administration tasks but also for usage of such helpful tools like  Vim  or  git 
 
 
 editor : the third major tool is a browser-based file editor with syntax highlighting for many different programming languages and file types as well as typical editing capabilities 
 
 

 Having Jupyter Notebook installed on a droplet allows to do Python development and deployment via the browser, circumventing the need to log in to the cloud instance via Secure Shell (SSH) access. 

 To accomplish the goal of this section, a number of files is needed. 

 
 
 server set-up script : this script orchestrates all steps necessary, like for instance copying other files to the droplet and running them on the droplet 
 
 
 Python and Jupyter installation script : this installs Python, additional packages, Jupyter Notebook and starts the Jupyter Notebook server 
 
 
 Jupyter Notebook configuration file : this file is for the configuration of the Jupyter Notebook server, e.g. with respect to password protection 
 
 
 RSA public and private key files : these two files are needed for the SSL encryption of the Jupyter Notebook server 
 
 

 In what follows, we work backwards through this list of files. 








 
 RSA Public and Private Keys 

 In order to accomplish a secure connection to the Jupyter Notebook server via an arbitrary browser, a SSL certificate consisting of RSA public and private keys (see  RSA Wikipedia page ) is needed. In general, one would expect that such a certificate comes from a so-called Certificate Authority (CA). For the purposes of this book, however, a self-generated certificate is " good enough “. 6  A popular tool to generate RSA key pairs is  OpenSSL . The brief interactive session to follow generates a certificate appropriate for use with a Jupyter Notebook server. 

 macbookpro:~/cloud$ openssl req -x509 -nodes -days 365 -newkey \
> rsa:1024 -out cert.pem -keyout cert.key
Generating a 1024 bit RSA private key
..++++++
.......++++++
writing new private key to 'cert.key'
-----
You are about to be asked to enter information that will be incorporated
into your certificate request.
What you are about to enter is what is called a Distinguished Name or a DN.
There are quite a few fields but you can leave some blank
For some fields there will be a default value,
If you enter '.', the field will be left blank.
-----
Country Name (2 letter code) [AU]:DE
State or Province Name (full name) [Some-State]:
Locality Name (eg, city) []:Voelklingen
Organization Name (eg, company) [Internet Widgits Pty Ltd]:TPQ GmbH
Organizational Unit Name (eg, section) []:Algo Trading
Common Name (e.g. server FQDN or YOUR name) []:Jupyter
Email Address []:team@tpq.io
macbookpro:~/cloud$ ls
cert.key    cert.pem
macbookpro:~/cloud$ 

 The two files  cert.key  and  cert.pem  need to be copied to the droplet and need to be referenced by the Jupyter Notebook configuration file. This file is presented next. 
 













 
 Jupyter Notebook Configuration File 

 A public Jupyter Notebook server can be deployed securely as explained on the  Running a Notebook Server page . Among others, Jupyter Notebook shall be password protected. To this end, there is a password hash code-generating function called  passwd  available in  notebook.auth  sub-package. The code below generates a password hash code with  jupyter  being the password itself. 

 macbookpro:~/cloud$ ipython
Python 3.6.1 |Continuum Analytics, Inc.| (default, May 11 2017, 13:04:09)
Type 'copyright', 'credits' or 'license' for more information
IPython 6.1.0 -- An enhanced Interactive Python. Type '?' for help.

In [1]: from notebook.auth import passwd

In [2]: passwd('jupyter')
Out[2]: 'sha1:4c72b4542011:0a8735a18ef2cba12fde3744886e61f76706299b'

In [3]: exit 

 This hash code needs to be placed in the Jupyter Notebook configuration file as presented in  Example 2-3 . The code  assumes that the RSA key files have been copied on the droplet to the  /root/.jupyter/  folder. 
 
 Example 2-3.  Jupyter Notebook configuration file 

 # 
 # Jupyter Notebook Configuration File 
 # 
 # Python for Finance 
 # (c) Dr. Yves J. Hilpisch 
 # 
 # SSL ENCRYPTION 
 # replace the following file names (and files used) by your choice/files 
 c . NotebookApp . certfile   =   u '/root/.jupyter/cert.pem' 
 c . NotebookApp . keyfile   =   u '/root/.jupyter/cert.key' 

 # IP ADDRESS AND PORT 
 # set ip to '*' to bind on all IP addresses of the cloud instance 
 c . NotebookApp . ip   =   '*' 
 # it is a good idea to set a known, fixed default port for server access 
 c . NotebookApp . port   =   8888 

 # PASSWORD PROTECTION 
 # here: 'jupyter' as password 
 # replace the hash code with the one for your password 
 c . NotebookApp . password   =   'sha1:bb5e01be158a:99465f872e0613a3041ec25b7860175f59847702' 

 # NO BROWSER OPTION 
 # prevent Jupyter from trying to open a browser 
 c . NotebookApp . open_browser   =   False 
 Caution 
 Deploying Jupyter Notebook in the cloud principally leads to a number of security issues since it is a full-fledged development environment accessible via a web browser. It is therefore of paramount importance to use the security measures that a Jupyter Notebook server provides by default, like password protection and SSL encryption. But this is just the beginning and further security measures might be advised depending on what exactly is done on the cloud instance. 
 

 The next step is to make sure that Python and Jupyter Notebook get installed on the droplet. 
 













 
 Installation Script for Python and Jupyter Notebook 

 The bash script to install Python and Jupyter Notebook is similar to the one presented in section  “Using Docker Containerization”  to install Python via Miniconda in a Docker container. However, the script here needs to start the Jupyter Notebook server as well. All major parts and lines of code are commented inline. 
 
 Example 2-4.  Bash script to install Python and to run the Jupyter Notebook server 

 #!/bin/bash 
 # 
 # Script to Install 
 # Linux System Tools and Basic Python Components 
 # as well as to 
 # Start Jupyter Notebook Server 
 # 
 # Python for Finance 
 # (c) Dr. Yves J. Hilpisch 
 # 
 # GENERAL LINUX 
apt-get update   # updates the package index cache 
apt-get upgrade -y   # updates packages 
 # install system tools 
apt-get install -y bzip2 gcc git htop screen htop vim wget
apt-get upgrade -y bash   # upgrades bash if necessary 
apt-get clean   # cleans up the package index cache 

 # INSTALLING MINICONDA 
wget https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh -O Miniconda.sh
bash Miniconda.sh -b   # installs Miniconda 
rm -rf Miniconda.sh   # removes the installer 
 # prepends the new path for current session 
 export  PATH = "/root/miniconda3/bin: $PATH " 
 # prepends the new path in the shell configuration 
cat >> ~/.profile  <<EOF 
 export PATH="/root/miniconda3/bin:$PATH" 
 EOF 

 # INSTALLING PYTHON LIBRARIES 
conda install -y jupyter   # interactive data analytics in the browser 
conda install -y pytables   # wrapper for HDF5 binary storage 
conda install -y pandas   #  data analysis package 
conda install -y pandas-datareader   # retrieval of open data 
conda install -y matplotlib   # standard plotting library 
conda install -y seaborn   # statistical plotting library 
conda install -y quandl   # wrapper for Quandl data API 
conda install -y scikit-learn   # machine learning library 
conda install -y tensorflow   # deep learning library 
conda install -y flask   # light weight web framework 
conda install -y openpyxl   # library for Excel interaction 
conda install -y pyyaml   # library to manage yaml files 

pip install --upgrade pip   # upgrading the package manager 
pip install q   # logging and debugging 
pip install plotly   # interactive D3.js plots 
pip install cufflinks   # combining plotly with pandas 

 # COPYING FILES AND CREATING DIRECTORIES 
mkdir /root/.jupyter
mv /root/jupyter_notebook_config.py /root/.jupyter/
mv /root/cert.* /root/.jupyter
mkdir /root/notebook
 cd  /root/notebook

 # STARTING JUPYTER NOTEBOOK 
jupyter notebook --allow-root 

 This script needs to be copied to the droplet and needs to be started by the orchestration script as described in the next sub-section. 
 













 
 Script to Orchestrate the Droplet Set-up 

 The second bash script which sets up the droplet is the shortest one. It mainly copies all the other files to the droplet for which the respective IP address is expected as a parameter. In the final line, it starts the  install.sh  bash script which in turn does the installation itself and starts the Jupyter Notebook server. 
 
 Example 2-5.  bash  script to setup the droplet 

 #!/bin/bash 
 # 
 # Setting up a DigitalOcean Droplet 
 # with Basic Python Stack 
 # and Jupyter Notebook 
 # 
 # Python for Finance 
 # (c) Dr Yves J Hilpisch 
 # 

 # IP ADDRESS FROM PARAMETER 
 MASTER_IP = $1 

 # COPYING THE FILES 
scp install.sh root@ ${ MASTER_IP } :
scp cert.* jupyter_notebook_config.py root@ ${ MASTER_IP } :

 # EXECUTING THE INSTALLATION SCRIPT 
ssh root@ ${ MASTER_IP }  bash /root/install.sh 

 Everything now is together to give the set-up code a try. On DigitalOcean, create a new droplet with options similar to these: 

 
 
 operating system : Ubuntu 16.04.3 x64 (the default choice as of 04. November 2017) 
 
 
 size : 1 core, 512 MB, 20GB SSD (smallest droplet) 
 
 
 data center region : Frankfurt (since your author lives in Germany) 
 
 
 SSH key : add a (new) SSH key for password-less login  7 
 
 
 droplet name : you can go with the pre-specified name or can choose something like  py4fi 
 
 

 Finally, clicking on the  Create  button initiates the droplet creation process which generally takes about one minute. The major outcome for proceeding with the set-up procedure is the IP address which might be, for instance, 46.101.156.199 when you have chosen Frankfurt as your data center location. Setting up the droplet now is as easy as follows: 

 (py3) macbookpro:~/cloud$ bash setup.sh 46.101.156.199 

 The resulting process, however, might take a couple of minutes. It is finished when there is a message from the Jupyter Notebook server saying something like: 

 The Jupyter Notebook is running at: https://[all ip addresses on your system]:8888/ 

 In any current browser, visiting the following address accesses the running Jupyter Notebook (note the  https  protocol): 

 https://46.101.156.199:8888 

 After maybe adding a security exception, the Jupyter Notebook login screen prompting for a password (in our case  jupyter ) should appear. Everything is now ready to start Python development in the browser via Jupyter Notebook,  IPython  via a terminal window or the text file editor. Other file management capabilities like file upload, deletion of files or creation of folders are also available. 
 Tip 
 Cloud instances like those from DigitalOcean and Jupyter Notebook are a powerful combination for the algorithmic trader to work on and make use of professional compute and storage infrastructure. Professional cloud and data center providers make sure that your (virtual) machines are physically secure and highly available. Using cloud instances also keeps the exploration and development phase at rather low costs since usage generally gets charged by the hour without the need to enter long term agreements. 
 
 





 













 
 Conclusions 

 Python is the programming language and technology platform of choice for this book. However, Python deployment can be tricky at best and sometimes even tedious and nerve wrecking. Fortunately, technologies are available today — all younger than five years — that help with the deployment issue. The open source software  conda  helps with both Python package and virtual environment management. Docker containers go even further in that complete file systems and runtime environments can be easily created in a technically shielded " sandbox “, i.e. the container. Going even one step further, cloud providers like DigitalOcean offer compute and storage capacity in professionally managed and secured data centers within minutes and billed by the hour. This in combination with a Python 3.6 installation and a secured Jupyter Notebook server installation provides a professional environment for Python development and deployment in the context of algorithmic trading projects. 
 













 
 Further Resources 

 For  Python package management , consult the following resources: 

 
 
 pip  package manager page 
 
 
 conda  package manager page 
 
 
 official Installing Packages page 
 
 

 For  virtual environment management , consult these resources: 

 
 
 virtualenv  environment manager page 
 
 
 conda  Managing Environments page 
 
 

 Information about  Docker containers  is found here: 

 
 
 Docker home page 
 
 
 Matthias, Karl and Sean Kane (2015):  Docker: Up and Running.  O’Reilly, Beijing et al. 
 
 

 Robbins (2016) provides a concise introduction to and overview of the  bash   scripting language . 

 
 
 Robbins, Arnold (2016):  Bash Pocket Reference . 2nd ed., O’Reilly, Beijing et al. 
 
 

 How to run a  public Jupyter Notebook server securely  is explained under  Running a Notebook Server . 

 To sign up on DigitalOcean with a 10 USD starting credit in your new account visit this  sign-up page . This pays for two months of usage of the smallest droplet. 
 







 1  At the time of this writing, Python 3.7beta has just been released. 2  On Windows, the command to activate the new environment would only be  activate py27  — dropping the  source . 3  In the official documentation you find the following explanation: " Python 'Virtual Environments' allow Python packages to be installed in an isolated location for a particular application, rather than being installed globally. " See the  Creating Virtual Environments page . 4  See the book Matthias and Kane (2015) for a comprehensive introduction to the Docker technology. 5  For a concise introduction to and quick overview of  bash  scripting consult the book Robbins (2016). 6  With such a self-generated certificate you might need to add a security exception when prompted by the browser. 7  If you need assistance, visit the  How To Use SSH Keys with DigitalOcean Droplets  or  How To Use SSH Keys with PuTTY on DigitalOcean Droplets (Windows users) . 
 
 



 
 
   
   
 Part II.  Mastering the Basics 

 
 This part of the book is concerned with the basics of Python programming. The topics covered in this part are fundamental for all other chapters to follow in subsequent parts. 

 The chapters are organized according to certain topics such that they can be used as a reference to which the reader can come to look up examples and details related to the topic of interest: 

 
 
 Chapter 3  on  Python  data types and structures 
 
 
 Chapter 4  on  NumPy  and its  ndarray  class 
 
 
 Chapter 5  on  pandas  and its  DataFrame  class 
 
 
 Chapter 6  on object oriented programming (OOP) with Python 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
 
   
   
 Chapter 3.  Data Types and Structures 

 
 Bad programmers worry about the code. Good programmers worry about data structures and their relationships. 
 Linus Torvalds 
 






 
 Introduction 

 This chapter introduces basic data types and data structures of  Python . Although the  Python  interpreter itself already brings a rich variety of data structures with it,  NumPy  and other libraries add to these in a valuable fashion. 

 The chapter is organized as follows: 
 
 “Basic Data Types” 
 
 The first section introduces basic data types such as  int ,  float , and  string . 
 
 “Basic Data Structures” 
 
 The next section introduces the fundamental data structures of Python (e.g.,  list  objects) and illustrates control structures, functional programming paradigms, and anonymous functions. 
 
 

 The spirit of this chapter is to provide a general introduction to  Python  specifics when it comes to data types and structures. If you are equipped with a background from another programing language, say  C  or  Matlab , you should be able to easily grasp the differences that  Python  usage might bring along. The topics introduced here are all important and fundamental for the chapters to come. 

 The chapter covers the following data types and structures: 
 

 
 
 object type 
 meaning 
 usage/model for 
 
 
 
 
 int 
 integer value 
 natural number 
 
 
 float 
 floating point number 
 real number 
 
 
 bool 
 boolean value 
 something true or false 
 
 
 str 
 string object 
 character, word, text 
 
 
 tuple 
 immutable container 
 fixed set of objects, record 
 
 
 list 
 mutable container 
 changing set of objects 
 
 
 dict 
 mutable container 
 key-value store 
 
 
 set 
 mutable container 
 collection of unique objects 
 
 
 
 













 
 Basic Data Types 

 Python  is a  dynamically typed  language, which means that the  Python  interpreter infers the type of an object at runtime. In comparison, compiled languages like  C  are generally  statically typed . In these cases, the type of an object has to be attached to the object before compile time. 1 








 
 Integers 

 One of the most fundamental data types is the integer, or  int : 

 In   [ 1 ]:   a   =   10 
         type ( a ) 
 Out [ 1 ]:   int 

 The built-in function  type  provides type information for all objects with standard and built-in types as well as for newly created classes and objects. In the latter case, the information provided depends on the description the programmer has stored with the class. There is a saying that “everything in  Python  is an object.” This means, for example, that even simple objects like the  int  object we just defined have built-in methods. For example, you can get the number of bits needed to represent the  int  object in-memory by calling the method  bit_length : 

 In   [ 2 ]:   a . bit_length () 
 Out [ 2 ]:   4 

 You will see that the number of bits needed increases the higher the integer value is that we assign to the object: 

 In   [ 3 ]:   a   =   100000 
         a . bit_length () 
 Out [ 3 ]:   17 

 In general, there are so many different methods that it is hard to memorize all methods of all classes and objects. Advanced  Python  environments, like  IPython , provide tab completion capabilities that show all methods attached to an object. You simply type the object name followed by a dot (e.g.,  a. ) and then press the Tab key, e.g.,  a. tab . This then provides a collection of methods you can call on the object. Alternatively, the  Python  built-in function  dir  gives a complete list of attributes and methods of any object. 

 A specialty of  Python  is that integers can be arbitrarily large. Consider, for example, the googol number 10 100 .  Python  has no problem with such large numbers, which are technically  long  objects: 

 In   [ 4 ]:   googol   =   10   **   100 
         googol 
 Out [ 4 ]:   10000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 

 In   [ 5 ]:   googol . bit_length () 
 Out [ 5 ]:   333 
 Large Integers 
 Python  integers can be arbitrarily large. The interpreter simply uses as many bits/bytes as needed to represent the numbers. 
 

 Arithmetical operations on integers are easy to implement: 

 In   [ 6 ]:   1   +   4 
 Out [ 6 ]:   5 

 In   [ 7 ]:   1   /   4 
 Out [ 7 ]:   0.25 

 In   [ 8 ]:   type ( 1   /   4 ) 
 Out [ 8 ]:   float 
 













 
 Floats 

 The last expression return the generally  desired  result of 0.25 (this is different in basic Python 2.7). This brings us to the next basic data type, the  float  object. Adding a dot to an integer value, like in  1.  or  1.0 , causes  Python  to interpret the object as a  float . Expressions involving a  float  also return a  float  object in general: 2 

 In   [ 9 ]:   1.6   /   4 
 Out [ 9 ]:   0.4 

 In   [ 10 ]:   type   ( 1.6   /   4 ) 
 Out [ 10 ]:   float 

 A  float  is a bit more involved in that the computerized representation of rational or real numbers is in general not exact and depends on the specific technical approach taken. To illustrate what this implies, let us define another  float  object  b .  float  objects like this one are always represented internally up to a certain degree of accuracy only. This becomes evident when adding 0.1 to  b : 

 In   [ 11 ]:   b   =   0.35 
          type ( b ) 
 Out [ 11 ]:   float 

 In   [ 12 ]:   b   +   0.1 
 Out [ 12 ]:   0.44999999999999996 

 The reason for this is that + float +s are internally represented in binary format; that is, a decimal number  
   
     0 
     < 
     n 
     < 
     1 
   
  is represented by a series of the form  
   
     n 
     = 
     x   2 
     + 
     y   4 
     + 
     z   8 
     + 
     . 
     . 
     . 
   
 . For certain floating-point numbers the binary representation might involve a large number of elements or might even be an infinite series. However, given a fixed number of bits used to represent such a number — i.e., a fixed number of terms in the representation series—inaccuracies are the consequence. Other numbers can be represented  perfectly  and are therefore stored exactly even with a finite number of bits available. Consider the following example: 

 In   [ 13 ]:   c   =   0.5 
          c . as_integer_ratio () 
 Out [ 13 ]:   ( 1 ,   2 ) 

 One half, i.e., 0.5, is stored exactly because it has an exact (finite) binary representation as  
   
     $ 
     0 
     . 
     5 
     = 
     1   2 
     $ 
   
 . However, for  b = 0.35  we get something different than the expected rational number  
   
     $ 
     0 
     . 
     35 
     = 
     7   20 
     $ 
   
 : 

 In   [ 14 ]:   b . as_integer_ratio () 
 Out [ 14 ]:   ( 3152519739159347 ,   9007199254740992 ) 

 The precision is dependent on the number of bits used to represent the number. In general, all platforms that  Python  runs on use the IEEE 754 double-precision standard (i.e., 64 bits), for internal representation. 3  This translates into a 15-digit relative accuracy. 

 Since this topic is of high importance for several application areas in finance, it is sometimes necessary to ensure the exact, or at least best possible, representation of numbers. For example, the issue can be of importance when summing over a large set of numbers. In such a situation, a certain kind and/or magnitude of representation error might, in aggregate, lead to significant deviations from a benchmark value. 

 The module  decimal  provides an arbitrary-precision object for floating-point numbers and several options to address precision issues when working with such numbers: 

 In   [ 15 ]:   import   decimal 
          from   decimal   import   Decimal 

 In   [ 16 ]:   decimal . getcontext () 
 Out [ 16 ]:   Context ( prec = 28 ,   rounding = ROUND_HALF_EVEN ,   Emin =- 999999 ,   Emax = 999999 ,   capitals = 1 ,   clamp = 0 ,   flags = [],   traps = [ InvalidOperation ,   DivisionByZero ,   Overflow ]) 

 In   [ 17 ]:   d   =   Decimal ( 1 )   /   Decimal   ( 11 ) 
          d 
 Out [ 17 ]:   Decimal ( '0.09090909090909090909090909091' ) 

 You can change the precision of the representation by changing the respective attribute value of the  Context  object: 

 In   [ 18 ] :   decimal . getcontext ( ) . prec   =   4    
 
 In   [ 19 ] :   e   =   Decimal ( 1 )   /   Decimal   ( 11 ) 
           e 
 Out [ 19 ] :   Decimal ( ' 0.09091 ' ) 
 
 In   [ 20 ] :   decimal . getcontext ( ) . prec   =   50    
 
 In   [ 21 ] :   f   =   Decimal ( 1 )   /   Decimal   ( 11 ) 
           f 
 Out [ 21 ] :   Decimal ( ' 0.090909090909090909090909090909090909090909090909091 ' ) 
 
 
 Lower precision than default. 
 
 Higher precision than default. 
 

 If needed, the precision can in this way be adjusted to the exact problem at hand and one can operate with floating-point objects that exhibit different degrees of accuracy: 

 In   [ 22 ]:   g   =   d   +   e   +   f 
          g 
 Out [ 22 ]:   Decimal ( '0.27272818181818181818181818181909090909090909090909' ) 
 Arbitrary-Precision Floats 
 The module  decimal  provides an arbitrary-precision floating-point number object. In finance, it might sometimes be necessary to ensure high precision and to go beyond the 64-bit double-precision standard. 
 
 













 
 Boolean 

 In programming, evaluating a comparison or logical expression, such as  4 > 3 ,  4.5 <= 3.25  or  (4 > 3) and (3 > 2)  , yields one of  True  or  False  as output, two important Python keywords. Others are, for example,  def ,  for  or  if . A complete list of Python keywords is available in the  keyword  module. 

 In   [ 23 ]:   import   keyword 

 In   [ 24 ]:   keyword . kwlist 
 Out [ 24 ]:   [ 'False' , 
           'None' , 
           'True' , 
           'and' , 
           'as' , 
           'assert' , 
           'break' , 
           'class' , 
           'continue' , 
           'def' , 
           'del' , 
           'elif' , 
           'else' , 
           'except' , 
           'finally' , 
           'for' , 
           'from' , 
           'global' , 
           'if' , 
           'import' , 
           'in' , 
           'is' , 
           'lambda' , 
           'nonlocal' , 
           'not' , 
           'or' , 
           'pass' , 
           'raise' , 
           'return' , 
           'try' , 
           'while' , 
           'with' , 
           'yield' ] 

 True  and  False  are of data type  bool , standing for a Boolean value. The following code shows Python’s  comparison  operators applied to the same operands with the resulting  bool  objects. 

 In   [ 25 ] :   4   >   3    
 Out [ 25 ] :   True 
 
 In   [ 26 ] :   type ( 4   >   3 ) 
 Out [ 26 ] :   bool 
 
 In   [ 27 ] :   type ( False ) 
 Out [ 27 ] :   bool 
 
 In   [ 28 ] :   4   > =   3    
 Out [ 28 ] :   True 
 
 In   [ 29 ] :   4   <   3    
 Out [ 29 ] :   False 
 
 In   [ 30 ] :   4   < =   3    
 Out [ 30 ] :   False 
 
 In   [ 31 ] :   4   ==   3    
 Out [ 31 ] :   False 
 
 In   [ 32 ] :   4   !=   3    
 Out [ 32 ] :   True 
 
 
 Is greater. 
 
 Is greater or equal. 
 
 Is smaller. 
 
 Is smaller or equal. 
 
 Is equal. 
 
 Is not equal. 
 

 Often,  logical  operators are applied on  bool  objects, which in turn yields another  bool  object. 

 In   [ 33 ]:   True   and   True 
 Out [ 33 ]:   True 

 In   [ 34 ]:   True   and   False 
 Out [ 34 ]:   False 

 In   [ 35 ]:   False   and   False 
 Out [ 35 ]:   False 

 In   [ 36 ]:   True   or   True 
 Out [ 36 ]:   True 

 In   [ 37 ]:   True   or   False 
 Out [ 37 ]:   True 

 In   [ 38 ]:   False   or   False 
 Out [ 38 ]:   False 

 In   [ 39 ]:   not   True 
 Out [ 39 ]:   False 

 In   [ 40 ]:   not   False 
 Out [ 40 ]:   True 

 Of course, both types of operators are often combined. 

 In   [ 41 ]:   ( 4   >   3 )   and   ( 2   >   3 ) 
 Out [ 41 ]:   False 

 In   [ 42 ]:   ( 4   ==   3 )   or   ( 2   !=   3 ) 
 Out [ 42 ]:   True 

 In   [ 43 ]:   not   ( 4   !=   4 ) 
 Out [ 43 ]:   True 

 In   [ 44 ]:   ( not   ( 4   !=   4 ))   and   ( 2   ==   3 ) 
 Out [ 44 ]:   False 

 One major application are is to control the code flow via other Python keywords, such as  if  or  while  (more examples later in the chapter). 

 In   [ 45 ] :   if   4   >   3 :    
               print ( ' condition true ' )    
 
           condition   true 
 
 
 In   [ 46 ] :   i   =   0    
           while   i   <   4 :    
               print ( ' condition true, i =  ' ,   i )    
               i   + =   1    
 
           condition   true ,   i   =    0 
           condition   true ,   i   =    1 
           condition   true ,   i   =    2 
           condition   true ,   i   =    3 
 
 
 If condition holds true, execute code to follow. 
 
 The code to be executed if condition holds true. 
 
 Initializes the parameter  i  with 0. 
 
 As long as the condition holds true, execute and repeat the code to follow. 
 
 Prints a text and the value of parameter  i . 
 
 Increases the parameter value by 1;  i += 1  is the same as  i = i + 1 . 
 

 Numerically, Python attaches a value of 0 to  False  and a value of 1 to  True . When transforming number to  bool  objects via the  bool()  function, a 0 gives  False  while all other numbers give  True . 

 In   [ 47 ]:   int ( True ) 
 Out [ 47 ]:   1 

 In   [ 48 ]:   int ( False ) 
 Out [ 48 ]:   0 

 In   [ 49 ]:   float ( True ) 
 Out [ 49 ]:   1.0 

 In   [ 50 ]:   float ( False ) 
 Out [ 50 ]:   0.0 

 In   [ 51 ]:   bool ( 0 ) 
 Out [ 51 ]:   False 

 In   [ 52 ]:   bool ( 0.0 ) 
 Out [ 52 ]:   False 

 In   [ 53 ]:   bool ( 1 ) 
 Out [ 53 ]:   True 

 In   [ 54 ]:   bool ( 10.5 ) 
 Out [ 54 ]:   True 

 In   [ 55 ]:   bool ( - 2 ) 
 Out [ 55 ]:   True 
 













 
 Strings 

 Now that we can represent natural and floating-point numbers, we turn to text. The basic data type to represent text in  Python  is the  string . The  string  object has a number of really helpful built-in methods. In fact,  Python  is generally considered to be a good choice when it comes to working with text files of any kind and any size. A  string  object is generally defined by single or double quotation marks or by converting another object using the  str  function (i.e., using the object’s standard or user-defined  string   representation ): 

 In   [ 56 ]:   t   =   'this is a string object' 

 With regard to the built-in methods, you can, for example, capitalize the first word in this object: 

 In   [ 57 ]:   t . capitalize () 
 Out [ 57 ]:   'This is a string object' 

 Or you can split it into its single-word components to get a  list  object of all the words (more on  list  objects later): 

 In   [ 58 ]:   t . split () 
 Out [ 58 ]:   [ 'this' ,   'is' ,   'a' ,   'string' ,   'object' ] 

 You can also search for a word and get the position (i.e., index value) of the first letter of the word back in a successful case: 

 In   [ 59 ]:   t . find ( 'string' ) 
 Out [ 59 ]:   10 

 If the word is not in the  string  object, the method returns -1: 

 In   [ 60 ]:   t . find ( 'Python' ) 
 Out [ 60 ]:   - 1 

 Replacing characters in a string is a typical task that is easily accomplished with the  replace  method: 

 In   [ 61 ]:   t . replace ( ' ' ,   '|' ) 
 Out [ 61 ]:   'this|is|a|string|object' 

 The stripping of strings—i.e., deletion of certain leading/lagging characters—is also often necessary: 

 In   [ 62 ]:   'http://www.python.org' . strip ( 'htp:/' ) 
 Out [ 62 ]:   'www.python.org' 

 Table 3-1  lists a number of helpful methods of the  string  object. 
 
 Table 3-1.  Selected string methods 
 
 
 Method 
 Arguments 
 Returns/result 
 
 
 
 
 capitalize 
 () 
 Copy of the string with first letter capitalized 
 
 
 count 
 (sub[, start[, end]]) 
 Count of the number of occurrences of substring 
 
 
 decode 
 ([encoding[, errors]]) 
 Decoded version of the string, using  encoding  (e.g., UTF-8) 
 
 
 encode 
 ([encoding+[, errors]]) 
 Encoded version of the string 
 
 
 find 
 (sub[, start[, end]]) 
 (Lowest) index where substring is found 
 
 
 join 
 (seq) 
 Concatenation of strings in sequence  seq 
 
 
 replace 
 (old, new[, count]) 
 Replaces  old  by  new  the first  count  times 
 
 
 split 
 ([sep[, maxsplit]]) 
 List of words in string with  sep  as separator 
 
 
 splitlines 
 ([keepends]) 
 Separated lines with line ends/breaks if  keepends  is  True 
 
 
 strip 
 (chars) 
 Copy of string with leading/lagging characters in  chars  removed 
 
 
 upper 
 () 
 Copy with all letters capitalized 
 
 
 
 Caution 
 A fundamental change from Python 2.7 (first edition of the book) to Python 3.6 (now used for the second edition) is the encoding and decoding of string objects and the introduction of Unicode (see  https://docs.python.org/3/howto/unicode.html ). This chapter does not allow to go into the many details important in this context. For the purposes of this book, which mainly deals with numerical data and standard strings containing English words, this omission seems justified. 
 
 













 
 Excursion: Printing and String Replacements 

 Printing  str  objects or string representations of other Python objects is usually accomplished by the  print()  function (used to be a statement in Python 2.7). 

 In   [ 63 ] :   print ( ' Python for Finance ' )    
 
           Python   for   Finance 
 
 
 In   [ 64 ] :   print ( t )    
 
           this   is   a   string   object 
 
 
 In   [ 65 ] :   i   =   0 
           while   i   <   4 : 
               print ( i )    
               i   + =   1 
 
           0 
           1 
           2 
           3 
 
 
 In   [ 66 ] :   i   =   0 
           while   i   <   4 : 
               print ( i ,   end = ' | ' )    
               i   + =   1 
 
           0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 
 
 
 Prints a  str  object. 
 
 Prints a  str  object referenced by a variable name. 
 
 Prints the string representation of an  int  object. 
 
 Specifies the final character(s) when printing; default is a line break  \n  as seen before. 
 

 Python offers powerful string replacement operations. There is the old way via the  %  character and the new way via curley brackets  {}  and  format() . Both are still applied in practice. This section cannot provide an exhaustive illustration of all options, but the following code snippets show some important ones. First, the  old  way of doing it. 

 In   [ 67 ] :   ' this is an integer  %d '   %   15    
 Out [ 67 ] :   ' this is an integer 15 ' 
 
 In   [ 68 ] :   ' this is an integer  %4d '   %   15    
 Out [ 68 ] :   ' this is an integer   15 ' 
 
 In   [ 69 ] :   ' this is an integer  %04d '   %   15    
 Out [ 69 ] :   ' this is an integer 0015 ' 
 
 In   [ 70 ] :   ' this is a float  %f '   %   15.3456    
 Out [ 70 ] :   ' this is a float 15.345600 ' 
 
 In   [ 71 ] :   ' this is a float  %.2f '   %   15.3456    
 Out [ 71 ] :   ' this is a float 15.35 ' 
 
 In   [ 72 ] :   ' this is a float  %8f '   %   15.3456    
 Out [ 72 ] :   ' this is a float 15.345600 ' 
 
 In   [ 73 ] :   ' this is a float  %8.2f '   %   15.3456    
 Out [ 73 ] :   ' this is a float    15.35 ' 
 
 In   [ 74 ] :   ' this is a float  %08.2f '   %   15.3456    
 Out [ 74 ] :   ' this is a float 00015.35 ' 
 
 In   [ 75 ] :   ' this is a string  %s '   %   ' Python '    
 Out [ 75 ] :   ' this is a string Python ' 
 
 In   [ 76 ] :   ' this is a string  %10s '   %   ' Python '    
 Out [ 76 ] :   ' this is a string     Python ' 
 
 
 int  object replacement. 
 
 With fixed number of characters. 
 
 With leading zeros if necessary. 
 
 float  object replacement. 
 
 With fixed number of decimals. 
 
 With fixed number of characters (and filled up decimals). 
 
 With fixed number of characters and decimals … 
 
 … and leading zeros if necessary. 
 
 str  object replacement. 
 
 With fixed number of characters. 
 

 The same examples now implemented in the  new  way. Notice the slight differences in the output in some places. 

 In   [ 77 ]:   'this is an integer {:d}' . format ( 15 ) 
 Out [ 77 ]:   'this is an integer 15' 

 In   [ 78 ]:   'this is an integer {:4d}' . format ( 15 ) 
 Out [ 78 ]:   'this is an integer   15' 

 In   [ 79 ]:   'this is an integer {:04d}' . format ( 15 ) 
 Out [ 79 ]:   'this is an integer 0015' 

 In   [ 80 ]:   'this is a float {:f}' . format ( 15.3456 ) 
 Out [ 80 ]:   'this is a float 15.345600' 

 In   [ 81 ]:   'this is a float {:.2f}' . format ( 15.3456 ) 
 Out [ 81 ]:   'this is a float 15.35' 

 In   [ 82 ]:   'this is a float {:8f}' . format ( 15.3456 ) 
 Out [ 82 ]:   'this is a float 15.345600' 

 In   [ 83 ]:   'this is a float {:8.2f}' . format ( 15.3456 ) 
 Out [ 83 ]:   'this is a float    15.35' 

 In   [ 84 ]:   'this is a float {:08.2f}' . format ( 15.3456 ) 
 Out [ 84 ]:   'this is a float 00015.35' 

 In   [ 85 ]:   'this is a string {:s}' . format ( 'Python' ) 
 Out [ 85 ]:   'this is a string Python' 

 In   [ 86 ]:   'this is a string {:10s}' . format ( 'Python' ) 
 Out [ 86 ]:   'this is a string Python    ' 

 String replacements are particularly useful in the context of multiple printing operations where the printed data is updated, for instance, during a  while  loop. 

 In   [ 87 ]:   i   =   0 
          while   i   <   4 : 
              print ( 'the number is  %d '   %   i ) 
              i   +=   1 

          the   number   is   0 
          the   number   is   1 
          the   number   is   2 
          the   number   is   3 


 In   [ 88 ]:   i   =   0 
          while   i   <   4 : 
              print ( 'the number is {:d}' . format ( i )) 
              i   +=   1 

          the   number   is   0 
          the   number   is   1 
          the   number   is   2 
          the   number   is   3 
 













 
 Excursion: Regular Expressions 

 A powerful tool when working with  string  objects is  regular expressions .  Python  provides such functionality in the module  re : 

 In   [ 89 ]:   import   re 

 Suppose you are faced with a large text file, such as a comma-separated value ( CSV ) file, which contains certain time series and respective date-time information. More often than not, the date-time information is delivered in a format that  Python  cannot interpret directly. However, the date-time information can generally be described by a regular expression. Consider the following  string  object, containing three date-time elements, three integers, and three strings. Note that triple quotation marks allow the definition of strings over multiple rows: 

 In   [ 90 ]:   series   =   """ 
          '01/18/2014 13:00:00', 100, '1st'; 
          '01/18/2014 13:30:00', 110, '2nd'; 
          '01/18/2014 14:00:00', 120, '3rd' 
          """ 

 The following regular expression describes the format of the date-time information provided in the  string  object: 4 

 In   [ 91 ]:   dt   =   re . compile ( "'[0-9/:\s]+'" )    # datetime 

 Equipped with this regular expression, we can go on and find all the date-time elements. In general, applying regular expressions to  string  objects also leads to performance improvements for typical parsing tasks: 

 In   [ 92 ]:   result   =   dt . findall ( series ) 
          result 
 Out [ 92 ]:   [ "'01/18/2014 13:00:00'" ,   "'01/18/2014 13:30:00'" ,   "'01/18/2014 14:00:00'" ] 
 Regular Expressions 
 When parsing  string  objects, consider using regular expressions, which can bring both convenience and performance to such  operations. 
 

 The resulting  string  objects can then be parsed to generate  Python datetime  objects (cf. [Link to Come] for an overview of handling date and time data with  Python ). To parse the  string  objects containing the date-time information, we need to provide information of how to parse—again as a  string  object: 

 In   [ 93 ]:   from   datetime   import   datetime 
          pydt   =   datetime . strptime ( result [ 0 ] . replace ( "'" ,   "" ), 
                                   ' %m / %d / %Y   %H : %M : %S ' ) 
          pydt 
 Out [ 93 ]:   datetime . datetime ( 2014 ,   1 ,   18 ,   13 ,   0 ) 

 In   [ 94 ]:   print ( pydt ) 

          2014 - 01 - 18   13 : 00 : 00 


 In   [ 95 ]:   print ( type ( pydt )) 

          < class   ' datetime . datetime '> 

 Later chapters provide more information on date-time data, the handling of such data, and  datetime  objects and their methods. This is just meant to be a teaser for this important topic in finance. 
 





 













 
 Basic Data Structures 

 As a general rule, data structures are objects that contain a possibly large number of other objects. Among those that  Python  provides as built-in structures are: 
 
 tuple 
 
 An immutable collection of arbitrary objects; only a few methods available 
 
 list 
 
 A mutable collection of arbitrary objects; many methods available 
 
 dict 
 
 A key-value store object 
 
 set 
 
 An unordered collection object for other  unique  objects 
 
 








 
 Tuples 

 A  tuple  is an advanced data structure, yet it’s still quite simple and limited in its applications. It is defined by providing objects in parentheses: 

 In   [ 96 ]:   t   =   ( 1 ,   2.5 ,   'data' ) 
          type ( t ) 
 Out [ 96 ]:   tuple 

 You can even drop the parentheses and provide multiple objects, just separated by commas: 

 In   [ 97 ]:   t   =   1 ,   2.5 ,   'data' 
          type ( t ) 
 Out [ 97 ]:   tuple 

 Like almost all data structures in  Python  the  tuple  has a built-in index, with the help of which you can retrieve single or multiple elements of the  tuple . It is important to remember that  Python  uses  zero-based numbering , such that the third element of a  tuple  is at index position 2: 

 In   [ 98 ]:   t [ 2 ] 
 Out [ 98 ]:   'data' 

 In   [ 99 ]:   type ( t [ 2 ]) 
 Out [ 99 ]:   str 
 Zero-Based Numbering 
 In contrast to some other programming languages like  Matlab ,  Python  uses zero-based numbering schemes. For example, the first element of a  tuple  object has index value 0. 
 

 There are only two special methods that this object type provides:  count  and  index . The first counts the number of occurrences of a certain object and the second gives the index value of the first appearance of it: 

 In   [ 100 ]:   t . count ( 'data' ) 
 Out [ 100 ]:   1 

 In   [ 101 ]:   t . index ( 1 ) 
 Out [ 101 ]:   0 

 tuple  objects are  immutable  objects. This means that they, once defined, cannot be changed easily. 
 













 
 Lists 

 Objects of type  list  are much more flexible and powerful in comparison to  tuple  objects. From a finance point of view, you can achieve a lot working only with  list  objects, such as storing stock price quotes and appending new data. A  list  object is defined through brackets and the basic capabilities and behavior are similar to those of  tuple  objects: 

 In   [ 102 ]:   l   =   [ 1 ,   2.5 ,   'data' ] 
           l [ 2 ] 
 Out [ 102 ]:   'data' 

 list  objects can also be defined or converted by using the function  list . The following code generates a new  list  object by converting the  tuple  object from the previous example: 

 In   [ 103 ]:   l   =   list ( t ) 
           l 
 Out [ 103 ]:   [ 1 ,   2.5 ,   'data' ] 

 In   [ 104 ]:   type ( l ) 
 Out [ 104 ]:   list 

 In addition to the characteristics of  tuple  objects,  list  objects are also expandable and reducible via different methods. In other words, whereas  string  and  tuple  objects are  immutable  sequence objects (with indexes) that cannot be changed once created,  list  objects are  mutable  and can be changed via different operations. You can append  list  objects to an existing  list  object, and more: 

 In   [ 105 ] :   l . append ( [ 4 ,   3 ] )    
            l 
 Out [ 105 ] :   [ 1 ,   2.5 ,   ' data ' ,   [ 4 ,   3 ] ] 
 
 In   [ 106 ] :   l . extend ( [ 1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] )    
            l 
 Out [ 106 ] :   [ 1 ,   2.5 ,   ' data ' ,   [ 4 ,   3 ] ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] 
 
 In   [ 107 ] :   l . insert ( 1 ,   ' insert ' )    
            l 
 Out [ 107 ] :   [ 1 ,   ' insert ' ,   2.5 ,   ' data ' ,   [ 4 ,   3 ] ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] 
 
 In   [ 108 ] :   l . remove ( ' data ' )    
            l 
 Out [ 108 ] :   [ 1 ,   ' insert ' ,   2.5 ,   [ 4 ,   3 ] ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] 
 
 In   [ 109 ] :   p   =   l . pop ( 3 )    
            print ( l ,   p ) 
 
            [ 1 ,   ' insert ' ,   2.5 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ]   [ 4 ,   3 ] 
 
 
 Append  list  object at the end. 
 
 Append elements of the  list  object. 
 
 Insert object before index position. 
 
 Remove first occurence of object. 
 
 Removes and returns object at index position. 
 

 Slicing is also easily accomplished. Here,  slicing  refers to an operation that breaks down a data set into smaller parts (of interest): 

 In   [ 110 ] :   l [ 2 : 5 ]    
 Out [ 110 ] :   [ 2.5 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ] 
 
 
 3rd to 5th element. 
 

 Table 3-2  provides a summary of selected operations and methods of the  list  object. 
 
 Table 3-2.  Selected operations and methods of list objects 
 
 
 Method 
 Arguments 
 Returns/result 
 
 
 
 
 l[i] = x 
 [i] 
 Replaces  i -th element by  x 
 
 
 l[i:j:k] = s 
 [i:j:k] 
 Replaces every  k -th element from  i  to  j - 1  by  s 
 
 
 append 
 (x) 
 Appends  x  to object 
 
 
 count 
 (x) 
 Number of occurrences of object  x 
 
 
 del l[i:j:k] 
 [i:j:k] 
 Deletes elements with index values  i  to  j – 1 
 
 
 extend 
 (s) 
 Appends all elements of  s  to object 
 
 
 index 
 (x[, i[, j]]) 
 First index of  x  between elements  i  and  j – 1 
 
 
 insert 
 (i, x) 
 Inserts  x  at/before index  i 
 
 
 remove 
 (i) 
 Removes element with index  i 
 
 
 pop 
 (i) 
 Removes element with index  i  and return it 
 
 
 reverse 
 () 
 Reverses all items in place 
 
 
 sort 
 ([cmp[, key[, reverse]]]) 
 Sorts all items in place 
 
 
 
 













 
 Excursion: Control Structures 

 Although a topic in itself,  control structures  like  for  loops are maybe best introduced in  Python  based on  list  objects. This is due to the fact that looping in general takes place over  list  objects, which is quite different to what is often the standard in other languages. Take the following example. The  for  loop loops over the elements of the  list  object  l  with index values 2 to 4 and prints the square of the respective elements. Note the importance of the indentation (whitespace) in the second line: 

 In   [ 111 ]:   for   element   in   l [ 2 : 5 ]: 
               print ( element   **   2 ) 

           6.25 
           1.0 
           2.25 

 This provides a really high degree of flexibility in comparison to the typical counter-based looping. Counter-based looping is also an option with  Python , but is accomplished based on the (standard)  list  object  range : 

 In   [ 112 ] :   r   =   range ( 0 ,   8 ,   1 )    
            r 
 Out [ 112 ] :   range ( 0 ,   8 ) 
 
 In   [ 113 ] :   type ( r ) 
 Out [ 113 ] :   range 
 
 
 Parameters are  start ,  end ,  step size . 
 

 For comparison, the same loop is implemented using  range  as follows: 

 In   [ 114 ]:   for   i   in   range ( 2 ,   5 ): 
               print ( l [ i ]   **   2 ) 

           6.25 
           1.0 
           2.25 
 Looping over Lists 
 In  Python  you can loop over arbitrary  list  objects, no matter what the content of the object is. This often avoids the introduction of a counter. 
 

 Python  also provides the typical (conditional) control elements  if ,  elif , and  else . Their use is comparable in other languages: 

 In   [ 115 ] :   for   i   in   range ( 1 ,   10 ) : 
                if   i   %   2   ==   0 :    
                    print ( " %d  is even "   %   i ) 
                elif   i   %   3   ==   0 : 
                    print ( " %d  is multiple of 3 "   %   i ) 
                else : 
                    print ( " %d  is odd "   %   i ) 
 
            1   is   odd 
            2   is   even 
            3   is   multiple   of   3 
            4   is   even 
            5   is   odd 
            6   is   even 
            7   is   odd 
            8   is   even 
            9   is   multiple   of   3 
 
 
 %  stands for modulo. 
 

 Similarly,  while  provides another means to control the flow: 

 In   [ 116 ]:   total   =   0 
           while   total   <   100 : 
               total   +=   1 
           print ( total ) 

           100 

 A specialty of  Python  is so-called  list   comprehensions . Instead of looping over existing  list  objects, this approach generates  list  objects via loops in a rather compact fashion: 

 In   [ 117 ]:   m   =   [ i   **   2   for   i   in   range ( 5 )] 
           m 
 Out [ 117 ]:   [ 0 ,   1 ,   4 ,   9 ,   16 ] 

 In a certain sense, this already provides a first means to generate “something like” vectorized code in that loops are rather more implicit than explicit (vectorization of code is discussed in more detail later in this chapter). 
 













 
 Excursion: Functional Programming 

 Python  provides a number of tools for functional programming support as well—i.e., the application of a function to a whole set of inputs (in our case  list  objects). Among these tools are  filter ,  map , and  reduce . However, we need a function definition first. To start with something really simple, consider a function  f  that returns the square of the input  x : 

 In   [ 118 ]:   def   f ( x ): 
               return   x   **   2 
           f ( 2 ) 
 Out [ 118 ]:   4 

 Of course, functions can be arbitrarily complex, with multiple input/parameter objects and even multiple outputs, (return objects). However, consider the following function: 

 In   [ 119 ]:   def   even ( x ): 
               return   x   %   2   ==   0 
           even ( 3 ) 
 Out [ 119 ]:   False 

 The return object is a Boolean. Such a function can be applied to a whole  list  object by using  map : 

 In   [ 120 ]:   list ( map ( even ,   range ( 10 ))) 
 Out [ 120 ]:   [ True ,   False ,   True ,   False ,   True ,   False ,   True ,   False ,   True ,   False ] 

 To this end, we can also provide a function definition directly as an argument to  map , by using  lambda  or  anonymous  functions: 

 In   [ 121 ]:   list ( map ( lambda   x :   x   **   2 ,   range ( 10 ))) 
 Out [ 121 ]:   [ 0 ,   1 ,   4 ,   9 ,   16 ,   25 ,   36 ,   49 ,   64 ,   81 ] 

 Functions can also be used to filter a  list  object. In the following example, the filter returns elements of a  list  object that match the Boolean condition as defined by the  even  function: 

 In   [ 122 ]:   list ( filter ( even ,   range ( 15 ))) 
 Out [ 122 ]:   [ 0 ,   2 ,   4 ,   6 ,   8 ,   10 ,   12 ,   14 ] 
 List Comprehensions, Functional Programming, Anonymous Functions 
 It can be considered  good practice  to avoid loops on the  Python  level as far as possible.  list  comprehensions and functional programming tools like  map ,  filter , and  reduce  provide means to write code without (explicit) loops that is both compact and in general more readable.  lambda  or anonymous functions are also powerful tools in this  context. 
 
 













 
 Dicts 

 dict  objects are dictionaries, and also mutable sequences, that allow data retrieval by keys that can, for example, be  string  objects. They are so-called  key-value stores . While  list  objects are ordered and sortable,  dict  objects are unordered and unsortable. An example best illustrates further differences to  list  objects. Curly brackets are what define  dict  objects: 

 In   [ 123 ]:   d   =   { 
                'Name'   :   'Angela Merkel' , 
                'Country'   :   'Germany' , 
                'Profession'   :   'Chancelor' , 
                'Age'   :   63 
                } 
           type ( d ) 
 Out [ 123 ]:   dict 

 In   [ 124 ]:   print ( d [ 'Name' ],   d [ 'Age' ]) 

           Angela   Merkel   63 

 Again, this class of objects has a number of built-in methods: 

 In   [ 125 ]:   d . keys () 
 Out [ 125 ]:   dict_keys ([ 'Name' ,   'Country' ,   'Profession' ,   'Age' ]) 

 In   [ 126 ]:   d . values () 
 Out [ 126 ]:   dict_values ([ 'Angela Merkel' ,   'Germany' ,   'Chancelor' ,   63 ]) 

 In   [ 127 ]:   d . items () 
 Out [ 127 ]:   dict_items ([( 'Name' ,   'Angela Merkel' ),   ( 'Country' ,   'Germany' ),   ( 'Profession' ,   'Chancelor' ),   ( 'Age' ,   63 )]) 

 In   [ 128 ]:   birthday   =   True 
           if   birthday   is   True : 
               d [ 'Age' ]   +=   1 
           print ( d [ 'Age' ]) 

           64 

 There are several methods to get  iterator  objects from the  dict  object. The objects behave like  list  objects when iterated over: 

 In   [ 129 ]:   for   item   in   d . items (): 
               print ( item ) 

           ( 'Name' ,   'Angela Merkel' ) 
           ( 'Country' ,   'Germany' ) 
           ( 'Profession' ,   'Chancelor' ) 
           ( 'Age' ,   64 ) 


 In   [ 130 ]:   for   value   in   d . values (): 
               print ( type ( value )) 

           < class   ' str '> 
           < class   ' str '> 
           < class   ' str '> 
           < class   ' int '> 

 Table 3-3  provides a summary of selected operations and methods of the  dict  object. 
 
 Table 3-3.  Selected operations and methods of dict objects 
 
 
 Method 
 Arguments 
 Returns/result 
 
 
 
 
 d[k] 
 [k] 
 Item of  d  with key  k 
 
 
 d[k] = x 
 [k] 
 Sets item key  k  to  x 
 
 
 del d[k] 
 [k] 
 Deletes item with key  k 
 
 
 clear 
 () 
 Removes all items 
 
 
 copy 
 () 
 Makes a copy 
 
 
 has_key 
 (k) 
 True  if  k  is a key 
 
 
 items 
 () 
 Iterator over all items 
 
 
 keys 
 () 
 Iterator over all keys 
 
 
 values 
 () 
 Iterator over all values 
 
 
 popitem 
 (k) 
 Returns and removes item with key  k 
 
 
 update 
 ([e]) 
 Updates items with items from  e 
 
 
 
 













 
 Sets 

 The last data structure we will consider is the  set  object. Although set theory is a cornerstone of mathematics and also finance theory, there are not too many practical applications for  set  objects. The objects are unordered collections of other objects,  containing  every element only once: 

 In   [ 131 ]:   s   =   set ([ 'u' ,   'd' ,   'ud' ,   'du' ,   'd' ,   'du' ]) 
           s 
 Out [ 131 ]:   { 'd' ,   'du' ,   'u' ,   'ud' } 

 In   [ 132 ]:   t   =   set ([ 'd' ,   'dd' ,   'uu' ,   'u' ]) 

 With  set  objects, you can implement operations as you are used to in mathematical set theory. For example, you can generate unions, intersections, and differences: 

 In   [ 133 ] :   s . union ( t )    
 Out [ 133 ] :   { ' d ' ,   ' dd ' ,   ' du ' ,   ' u ' ,   ' ud ' ,   ' uu ' } 
 
 In   [ 134 ] :   s . intersection ( t )    
 Out [ 134 ] :   { ' d ' ,   ' u ' } 
 
 In   [ 135 ] :   s . difference ( t )    
 Out [ 135 ] :   { ' du ' ,   ' ud ' } 
 
 In   [ 136 ] :   t . difference ( s )    
 Out [ 136 ] :   { ' dd ' ,   ' uu ' } 
 
 In   [ 137 ] :   s . symmetric_difference ( t )    
 Out [ 137 ] :   { ' dd ' ,   ' du ' ,   ' ud ' ,   ' uu ' } 
 
 
 All of  s  and  t . 
 
 Both in  s  and  t . 
 
 In  s  but not in  t . 
 
 In  t  but not in  s . 
 
 In either one but not both. 
 

 One application of  set  objects is to get rid of duplicates in a  list  object. For example: 

 In   [ 138 ] :   from   random   import   randint 
            l   =   [ randint ( 0 ,   10 )   for   i   in   range ( 1000 ) ]    
            len ( l )    
 Out [ 138 ] :   1000 
 
 In   [ 139 ] :   l [ : 20 ] 
 Out [ 139 ] :   [ 10 ,   9 ,   2 ,   4 ,   5 ,   1 ,   7 ,   4 ,   6 ,   10 ,   9 ,   5 ,   4 ,   6 ,   10 ,   3 ,   4 ,   7 ,   0 ,   5 ] 
 
 In   [ 140 ] :   s   =   set ( l ) 
            s 
 Out [ 140 ] :   { 0 ,   1 ,   2 ,   3 ,   4 ,   5 ,   6 ,   7 ,   8 ,   9 ,   10 } 
 
 
 1,000 random integers between 0 and 10. 
 
 Number of elements in  l . 
 
 





 













 
 Conclusions 

 The basic  Python  interpreter provides already a rich set of flexible data structures. From a finance point of view, the following can be considered the most important ones: 
 
 Basic data types 
 
 In finance, the classes  int ,  float , and  string  provide the atomic data types. 
 
 Standard data structures 
 
 The classes  tuple ,  list ,  dict , and  set  have many application areas in finance, with  list  being the most flexible workhorse in general. 
 
 
 













 
 Further Resources 

 This chapter focuses on those issues that might be of particular importance for finance algorithms and applications. However, it can only represent a starting point for the exploration of data structures and data modeling in  Python . There are a number of valuable resources available to go deeper from here. 

 Good references in book form are: 

 
 
 Goodrich, Michael et al. (2013):  Data Structures and Algorithms in Python.  John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ. 
 
 
 Harrison, Matt (2017):  Illustrated Guide to Python 3.  Treading on Python Series. 
 
 
 Ramalho, Luciano (2016):  Fluent Python . O’Reilly, Beijing et al. 
 
 
 







 1  The  Cython  library  brings static typing and compiling features to  Python  that are comparable to those in  C . In fact,  Cython  is a hybrid language of  Python  and  C . 2  Here and in the following discussion, terms like  float ,  float object , etc. are used interchangeably, acknowledging that every  float  is also an  object . The same holds true for other object types. 3  Cf.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double-precision_floating-point_format . 4  It is not possible to go into details here, but there is a wealth of information available on the Internet about regular expressions in general and for  Python  in particular. For an introduction to this topic, refer to Fitzgerald, Michael (2012):  Introducing Regular Expressions . O’Reilly, Sebastopol, CA. 
 
 



 
 
   
   
 Chapter 4.  Numerical Computing with NumPy 

 
 Computers are useless. They can only give answers. 
 Pablo Picasso 
 






 
 Introduction 

 This chapter introduces basic data types and data structures of  Python . Although the  Python  interpreter itself already brings a rich variety of data structures with it,  NumPy  and other libraries add to these in a valuable fashion. 

 The chapter is organized as follows: 
 
 Arrays of data 
 
 This section discusses the concept of arrays in some detail and illustrates basic options to work with arrays of data in Python. 
 
 NumPy data structures 
 
 This section is devoted to the characteristics and capabilities of the  NumPy   ndarray  class and illustrates some of the benefits of this class for scientific and financial applications. 
 
 Vectorization of code 
 
 This section illustrates that, thanks to  NumPy ’s array class, vectorized code is easily implemented, leading to more compact and also better-performing code. 
 
 

 The chapter covers the following data structures: 
 

 
 
 object type 
 meaning 
 usage/model for 
 
 
 
 
 ndarray  (regular) 
 n-dimensional array object 
 large arrays of numerical data 
 
 
 ndarray  (record) 
 2-dimensional array object 
 tabular data organized in columns 
 
 
 

 This chapter is organized as follows: 
 
 “Arrays of Data” 
 
 This section is about the handling of arrays of data with pure Python code. 
 
 [Link to Come] 
 
 This is the core section about the regular  NumPy   ndarray  class; it is the work horse in almost all data intensive Python use cases. 
 
 [Link to Come] 
 
 This brief section introduces structured (or record)  ndarray  objects for the handling of tabular data with columns. 
 
 “Vectorization of Code” 
 
 In this section, vectorization of code is discusses with its benefits; the section also discusses the importance of memory layout in certain scenarios. 
 
 
 













 
 Arrays of Data 

 The previous chapter shows that  Python  provides some quite useful and flexible general data structures. In particular,  list  objects can be considered a real workhorse with many convenient characteristics and application areas. The cost to pay when using such a flexible (mutable) data structure in general comes in the form of relatively high memory usage, slower performance or both. However, scientific and financial applications generally have a need for high-performing operations on special data structures. One of the most important data structures in this regard is the  array . Arrays generally structure other (fundamental) objects of the  same data type  in rows and columns. 

 Assume for the moment that we work with numbers only, although the concept generalizes to other types of data as well. In the simplest case, a one-dimensional array then represents, mathematically speaking, a  vector  of, in general, real numbers, internally represented by  float  objects. It then consists of a  single  row or column of elements only. In a more common case, an array represents an  i  ×  j   matrix  of elements. This concept generalizes to  i  ×  j  ×  k   cubes  of elements in three dimensions as well as to general  n -dimensional arrays of shape  i  ×  j  ×  k  ×  l  × … . 

 Mathematical disciplines like linear algebra and vector space theory illustrate that such mathematical structures are of high importance in a number of scientific disciplines and fields. It can therefore prove fruitful to have available a specialized class of data structures explicitly designed to handle arrays conveniently and efficiently. This is where the  Python  library  NumPy  comes into play, with its  ndarray  class. Before introducing its powerful  ndarray  class in the next section, this section illustrates two alternatives for the handling of arrays. 








 
 Arrays with Python Lists 

 Before we turn to  NumPy , let us first construct arrays with the built-in data structures presented in the previous section.  list  objects are particularly suited to accomplishing this task. A simple  list  can already be considered a one-dimensional array: 

 In   [ 1 ] :   v   =   [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ]    
 
 
 list  object with numbers. 
 

 Since  list  objects can contain arbitrary other objects, they can also contain other  list  objects. In that way, two- and higher-dimensional arrays are easily constructed by nested  list  objects: 

 In   [ 2 ] :   m   =   [ v ,   v ,   v ]    
          m    
 Out [ 2 ] :   [ [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] , 
           [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] , 
           [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] ] 
 
 
 list  object with  list  objects … 
 
 … resulting in a matrix of numbers. 
 

 We can also easily select rows via simple indexing or single elements via double indexing (whole columns, however, are not so easy to select): 

 In   [ 3 ]:   m [ 1 ] 
 Out [ 3 ]:   [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] 

 In   [ 4 ]:   m [ 1 ][ 0 ] 
 Out [ 4 ]:   0.5 

 Nesting can be pushed further for even more general structures: 

 In   [ 5 ] :   v1   =   [ 0.5 ,   1.5 ] 
          v2   =   [ 1 ,   2 ] 
          m   =   [ v1 ,   v2 ] 
          c   =   [ m ,   m ]    
          c 
 Out [ 5 ] :   [ [ [ 0.5 ,   1.5 ] ,   [ 1 ,   2 ] ] ,   [ [ 0.5 ,   1.5 ] ,   [ 1 ,   2 ] ] ] 
 
 In   [ 6 ] :   c [ 1 ] [ 1 ] [ 0 ] 
 Out [ 6 ] :   1 
 
 
 Cube of numbers. 
 

 Note that combining objects in the way just presented generally works with reference pointers to the original objects. What does that mean in practice? Let us have a look at the following operations: 

 In   [ 7 ]:   v   =   [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] 
         m   =   [ v ,   v ,   v ] 
         m 
 Out [ 7 ]:   [[ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ], 
          [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ], 
          [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ]] 

 Now change the value of the first element of the  v  object and see what happens to the  m  object: 

 In   [ 8 ]:   v [ 0 ]   =   'Python' 
         m 
 Out [ 8 ]:   [[ 'Python' ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ], 
          [ 'Python' ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ], 
          [ 'Python' ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ]] 

 This can be avoided by using the  deepcopy  function of the  copy  module: 

 In   [ 9 ] :   from   copy   import   deepcopy 
          v   =   [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] 
          m   =   3   *   [ deepcopy ( v ) ,   ]    
          m 
 Out [ 9 ] :   [ [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] , 
           [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] , 
           [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] ] 
 
 In   [ 10 ] :   v [ 0 ]   =   ' Python '    
           m    
 Out [ 10 ] :   [ [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] , 
            [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] , 
            [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] ] 
 
 
 Instead of reference pointer, physical copies are used. 
 
 As a consequence, a change in the original object … 
 
 … does not have any impact anymore. 
 
 













 
 The Python Array Class 

 The is a dedicated  array  module in Python available . As you can read on the documentation page (see  https://docs.python.org/3/library/array.html ): 
 
 This module defines an object type which can compactly represent an array of basic values: characters, integers, floating point numbers. Arrays are sequence types and behave very much like lists, except that the type of objects stored in them is constrained. The type is specified at object creation time by using a type code, which is a single character. 

 Consider the following code, that instantiates an  array  object out of a  list  object. 

 In   [ 11 ] :   v   =   [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] 
 
 In   [ 12 ] :   import   array 
 
 In   [ 13 ] :   a   =   array . array ( ' f ' ,   v )    
           a 
 Out [ 13 ] :   array ( ' f ' ,   [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 14 ] :   a . append ( 0.5 )    
           a 
 Out [ 14 ] :   array ( ' f ' ,   [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ,   0.5 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 15 ] :   a . extend ( [ 5.0 ,   6.75 ] )    
           a 
 Out [ 15 ] :   array ( ' f ' ,   [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ,   0.5 ,   5.0 ,   6.75 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 16 ] :   2   *   a    
 Out [ 16 ] :   array ( ' f ' ,   [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ,   0.5 ,   5.0 ,   6.75 ,   0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ,   0.5 ,   5.0 ,   6.75 ] ) 
 
 
 The instantiation of the  array  object with  float  as the type code. 
 
 Major methods work similar to those of the  list  object. 
 
 Although “scalar multiplication” works in principle, the result is not the mathematically expected one; rather the elements are repeated. 
 

 Trying to append an object of a different than the specified data type, raises a  TypeError . 

 In   [ 17 ] :   # a.append('string')   
 
 In   [ 18 ] :   a . tolist ( )    
 Out [ 18 ] :   [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ,   0.5 ,   5.0 ,   6.75 ] 
 
 
 Only  float  objects can be appended; other data types/type codes raise errors. 
 
 However, the  array  object can easily be converted back to a  list  object if such flexibility is required. 
 

 An advantage of the  array  class is that it has built-in storage and retrieval functionality. 

 In   [ 19 ] :   f   =   open ( ' array.apy ' ,   ' wb ' )    
           a . tofile ( f )    
           f . close ( )    
 
 In   [ 20 ] :   with   open ( ' array.apy ' ,   ' wb ' )   as   f :    
               a . tofile ( f )    
 
 In   [ 21 ] :   ! ls   - n   arr *    
 
           - rw - r - - r - - @   1   503    20    32   29   Dez   17 : 08   array . apy 
 
 
 Opens a file on disk for writing binary data. 
 
 Writes the  array  data to the file. 
 
 Closes the file. 
 
 Alternatively, a  with  context can be used for the same operation. 
 
 This shows the file as written on disk. 
 

 As before, the data type of the  array  object is of importance when reading the data from disk. 

 In   [ 22 ] :   b   =   array . array ( ' f ' )    
 
 In   [ 23 ] :   with   open ( ' array.apy ' ,   ' rb ' )   as   f :    
               b . fromfile ( f ,   5 )    
 
 In   [ 24 ] :   b    
 Out [ 24 ] :   array ( ' f ' ,   [ 0.5 ,   0.75 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 25 ] :   b   =   array . array ( ' d ' )    
 
 In   [ 26 ] :   with   open ( ' array.apy ' ,   ' rb ' )   as   f : 
               b . fromfile ( f ,   2 )    
 
 In   [ 27 ] :   b    
 Out [ 27 ] :   array ( ' d ' ,   [ 0.0004882813645963324 ,   0.12500002956949174 ] ) 
 
 
 A new  array  object with type code  float . 
 
 Opens the file for reading binary data … 
 
 … and reads five elements in the  b  object. 
 
 A new  array  object with type code  double . 
 
 Reading two elements from the file. 
 
 The difference in type codes leads to “wrong” numbers. 
 
   
 
 





 













 
 Regular NumPy Arrays 

 Obviously, composing array structures with  list  objects works, somewhat. But it is not really convenient, and the  list  class has not been built with this specific goal in mind. It has rather been built with a much broader and more general scope. The  array  class is already a bit more specialized providing some useful features for working with arrays of data. However, some kind of “highly” specialized class could therefore be really beneficial to handle array-type structures. 








 
 The Basics 

 Such a specialized class is the  numpy.ndarray  class, which has been built with the specific goal of handling  n -dimensional arrays both conveniently and efficiently—i.e., in a highly performing manner. The basic handling of instances of this class is again best illustrated by examples: 

 In   [ 28 ] :   import   numpy   as   np    
 
 In   [ 29 ] :   a   =   np . array ( [ 0 ,   0.5 ,   1.0 ,   1.5 ,   2.0 ] )    
           a 
 Out [ 29 ] :   array ( [   0.   ,    0.5 ,    1.   ,    1.5 ,    2.   ] ) 
 
 In   [ 30 ] :   type ( a )    
 Out [ 30 ] :   numpy . ndarray 
 
 In   [ 31 ] :   a   =   np . array ( [ ' a ' ,   ' b ' ,   ' c ' ] )    
           a 
 Out [ 31 ] :   array ( [ ' a ' ,   ' b ' ,   ' c ' ] , 
                 dtype = ' <U1 ' ) 
 
 In   [ 32 ] :   a   =   np . arange ( 2 ,   20 ,   2 )    
           a 
 Out [ 32 ] :   array ( [   2 ,    4 ,    6 ,    8 ,   10 ,   12 ,   14 ,   16 ,   18 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 33 ] :   a   =   np . arange ( 8 ,   dtype = np . float )    
           a 
 Out [ 33 ] :   array ( [   0. ,    1. ,    2. ,    3. ,    4. ,    5. ,    6. ,    7. ] ) 
 
 In   [ 34 ] :   a [ 5 : ]    
 Out [ 34 ] :   array ( [   5. ,    6. ,    7. ] ) 
 
 In   [ 35 ] :   a [ : 2 ]    
 Out [ 35 ] :   array ( [   0. ,    1. ] ) 
 
 
 Import the  numpy  package. 
 
 Creates an  ndarray  object out of a  list  object with floats. 
 
 Creates an  ndarray  object out of a  list  object with strings. 
 
 np.arange  works similar to  range . 
 
 However, it takes as additional input the  dtype  parameter. 
 
 With one-dimensional  ndarray  objects, indexing works as usual. 
 

 A major feature of the  ndarray  class is the  multitude of built-in methods . For instance: 

 In   [ 36 ] :   a . sum ( )    
 Out [ 36 ] :   28.0 
 
 In   [ 37 ] :   a . std ( )    
 Out [ 37 ] :   2.2912878474779199 
 
 In   [ 38 ] :   a . cumsum ( )    
 Out [ 38 ] :   array ( [    0. ,     1. ,     3. ,     6. ,    10. ,    15. ,    21. ,    28. ] ) 
 
 
 The sum of all elements. 
 
 The standard deviation of the elements. 
 
 The cumulative sum over all elements (starting at index position 0). 
 

 Another major feature is the (vectorized)  mathematical operations  defined on  ndarray  objects: 

 In   [ 39 ] :   l   =   [ 0. ,   0.5 ,   1.5 ,   3. ,   5. ] 
           2   *   l    
 Out [ 39 ] :   [ 0.0 ,   0.5 ,   1.5 ,   3.0 ,   5.0 ,   0.0 ,   0.5 ,   1.5 ,   3.0 ,   5.0 ] 
 
 In   [ 40 ] :   a 
 Out [ 40 ] :   array ( [   0. ,    1. ,    2. ,    3. ,    4. ,    5. ,    6. ,    7. ] ) 
 
 In   [ 41 ] :   2   *   a    
 Out [ 41 ] :   array ( [    0. ,     2. ,     4. ,     6. ,     8. ,    10. ,    12. ,    14. ] ) 
 
 In   [ 42 ] :   a   * *   2    
 Out [ 42 ] :   array ( [    0. ,     1. ,     4. ,     9. ,    16. ,    25. ,    36. ,    49. ] ) 
 
 In   [ 43 ] :   2   * *   a    
 Out [ 43 ] :   array ( [     1. ,      2. ,      4. ,      8. ,     16. ,     32. ,     64. ,    128. ] ) 
 
 In   [ 44 ] :   a   * *   a    
 Out [ 44 ] :   array ( [    1.00000000e+00 ,     1.00000000e+00 ,     4.00000000e+00 , 
                    2.70000000e+01 ,     2.56000000e+02 ,     3.12500000e+03 , 
                    4.66560000e+04 ,     8.23543000e+05 ] ) 
 
 
 “Scalar multiplication” with  list  objects leads to a repetition of elements. 
 
 By contrast, working with  ndarray  objects implements a proper scalar multiplication, for instance. 
 
 This calculates element-wise the square values. 
 
 This interprets the elements of the  ndarray  as the powers. 
 
 This calculates the power of every element to itself. 
 

 Another important feature of the  NumPy  package are  universal functions . They are “universal” in the sense that they in general operate on  ndarray  object as well as on basic Python data types. However, when applying universal functions to, say, a Python  float  object, one needs to be aware of the reduced performance compared to the same functionality found in the  math  module. 

 In   [ 45 ] :   np . exp ( a )    
 Out [ 45 ] :   array ( [    1.00000000e+00 ,     2.71828183e+00 ,     7.38905610e+00 , 
                    2.00855369e+01 ,     5.45981500e+01 ,     1.48413159e+02 , 
                    4.03428793e+02 ,     1.09663316e+03 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 46 ] :   np . sqrt ( a )    
 Out [ 46 ] :   array ( [   0.          ,    1.          ,    1.41421356 ,    1.73205081 ,    2.          , 
                   2.23606798 ,    2.44948974 ,    2.64575131 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 47 ] :   np . sqrt ( 2.5 )    
 Out [ 47 ] :   1.5811388300841898 
 
 In   [ 48 ] :   import   math    
 
 In   [ 49 ] :   math . sqrt ( 2.5 )    
 Out [ 49 ] :   1.5811388300841898 
 
 In   [ 50 ] :   # math.sqrt(a)   
 
 In   [ 51 ] :   % timeit   np . sqrt ( 2.5 )    
 
           703   ns   ±   17.9   ns   per   loop   ( mean   ±   std .   dev .   of   7   runs ,   1000000   loops   each ) 
 
 
 In   [ 52 ] :   % timeit   math . sqrt ( 2.5 )    
 
           107   ns   ±   1.48   ns   per   loop   ( mean   ±   std .   dev .   of   7   runs ,   10000000   loops   each ) 
 
 
 Calculates the exponential values element-wise. 
 
 Calculates the square root for every element. 
 
 Calculates the square root for a Python  float  object. 
 
 The same calculation, this time using the  math  module. 
 
 The  math.sqrt  cannot be applied to the  ndarray  object directly. 
 
 Applying the universal function  np.sqrt  to a Python  float  object … 
 
 … is much slower than the same operation with the  math.sqrt  function. 
 
 













 
 Multiple Dimensions 

 The transition to more than one dimension is seamless, and all features presented so far carry over to the more general cases. In particular, the indexing system is made consistent across all dimensions: 

 In   [ 53 ] :   b   =   np . array ( [ a ,   a   *   2 ] )    
           b 
 Out [ 53 ] :   array ( [ [    0. ,     1. ,     2. ,     3. ,     4. ,     5. ,     6. ,     7. ] , 
                  [    0. ,     2. ,     4. ,     6. ,     8. ,    10. ,    12. ,    14. ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 54 ] :   b [ 0 ]    
 Out [ 54 ] :   array ( [   0. ,    1. ,    2. ,    3. ,    4. ,    5. ,    6. ,    7. ] ) 
 
 In   [ 55 ] :   b [ 0 ,   2 ]    
 Out [ 55 ] :   2.0 
 
 In   [ 56 ] :   b [ : ,   1 ]    
 Out [ 56 ] :   array ( [   1. ,    2. ] ) 
 
 In   [ 57 ] :   b . sum ( )    
 Out [ 57 ] :   84.0 
 
 In   [ 58 ] :   b . sum ( axis = 0 )    
 Out [ 58 ] :   array ( [    0. ,     3. ,     6. ,     9. ,    12. ,    15. ,    18. ,    21. ] ) 
 
 In   [ 59 ] :   b . sum ( axis = 1 )    
 Out [ 59 ] :   array ( [   28. ,    56. ] ) 
 
 
 Constructs a two-dimensional  ndarray  object out of the one-dimensional one. 
 
 Selects the first row. 
 
 Selects the third element in the first row; indices are separated, within the brackets, by a comma. 
 
 Selects the second column. 
 
 Calculates the sum over  all  values. 
 
 Calculates the sum along the first axis, i.e. column-wise. 
 
 Calculates the sum along the second axis, i.e. row-wise. 
 

 There are a number of ways to initialize (instantiate)  ndarray  objects. One is as presented before, via  np.array . However, this assumes that all elements of the array are already available. In contrast, one would maybe like to have the  ndarray  objects instantiated first to populate them later with results generated during the execution of code. To this end, we can use the following functions: 

 In   [ 60 ] :   c   =   np . zeros ( ( 2 ,   3 ) ,   dtype = ' i ' ,   order = ' C ' )    
           c 
 Out [ 60 ] :   array ( [ [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ] , 
                  [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ] ] ,   dtype = int32 ) 
 
 In   [ 61 ] :   c   =   np . ones ( ( 2 ,   3 ,   4 ) ,   dtype = ' i ' ,   order = ' C ' )    
           c 
 Out [ 61 ] :   array ( [ [ [ 1 ,   1 ,   1 ,   1 ] , 
                   [ 1 ,   1 ,   1 ,   1 ] , 
                   [ 1 ,   1 ,   1 ,   1 ] ] , 
 
                  [ [ 1 ,   1 ,   1 ,   1 ] , 
                   [ 1 ,   1 ,   1 ,   1 ] , 
                   [ 1 ,   1 ,   1 ,   1 ] ] ] ,   dtype = int32 ) 
 
 In   [ 62 ] :   d   =   np . zeros_like ( c ,   dtype = ' f16 ' ,   order = ' C ' )    
           d 
 Out [ 62 ] :   array ( [ [ [   0.0 ,    0.0 ,    0.0 ,    0.0 ] , 
                   [   0.0 ,    0.0 ,    0.0 ,    0.0 ] , 
                   [   0.0 ,    0.0 ,    0.0 ,    0.0 ] ] , 
 
                  [ [   0.0 ,    0.0 ,    0.0 ,    0.0 ] , 
                   [   0.0 ,    0.0 ,    0.0 ,    0.0 ] , 
                   [   0.0 ,    0.0 ,    0.0 ,    0.0 ] ] ] ,   dtype = float128 ) 
 
 In   [ 63 ] :   d   =   np . ones_like ( c ,   dtype = ' f16 ' ,   order = ' C ' )    
           d 
 Out [ 63 ] :   array ( [ [ [   1.0 ,    1.0 ,    1.0 ,    1.0 ] , 
                   [   1.0 ,    1.0 ,    1.0 ,    1.0 ] , 
                   [   1.0 ,    1.0 ,    1.0 ,    1.0 ] ] , 
 
                  [ [   1.0 ,    1.0 ,    1.0 ,    1.0 ] , 
                   [   1.0 ,    1.0 ,    1.0 ,    1.0 ] , 
                   [   1.0 ,    1.0 ,    1.0 ,    1.0 ] ] ] ,   dtype = float128 ) 
 
 In   [ 64 ] :   e   =   np . empty ( ( 2 ,   3 ,   2 ) )    
           e 
 Out [ 64 ] :   array ( [ [ [    0.00000000e+000 ,    - 4.34540174e-311 ] , 
                   [    2.96439388e-323 ,     0.00000000e+000 ] , 
                   [    0.00000000e+000 ,     1.16095484e-028 ] ] , 
 
                  [ [    2.03147708e-110 ,     9.67661175e-144 ] , 
                   [    9.80058441e+252 ,     1.23971686e+224 ] , 
                   [    4.00695466e+252 ,     8.34404939e-309 ] ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 65 ] :   f   =   np . empty_like ( c )    
           f 
 Out [ 65 ] :   array ( [ [ [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ,   0 ] , 
                   [ 9 ,   0 ,   0 ,   0 ] , 
                   [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ,   0 ] ] , 
 
                  [ [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ,   0 ] , 
                   [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ,   0 ] , 
                   [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ,   0 ] ] ] ,   dtype = int32 ) 
 
 In   [ 66 ] :   np . eye ( 5 )    
 Out [ 66 ] :   array ( [ [   1. ,    0. ,    0. ,    0. ,    0. ] , 
                  [   0. ,    1. ,    0. ,    0. ,    0. ] , 
                  [   0. ,    0. ,    1. ,    0. ,    0. ] , 
                  [   0. ,    0. ,    0. ,    1. ,    0. ] , 
                  [   0. ,    0. ,    0. ,    0. ,    1. ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 67 ] :   g   =   np . linspace ( 5 ,   15 ,   15 )   
           g 
 Out [ 67 ] :   array ( [    5.          ,     5.71428571 ,     6.42857143 ,     7.14285714 , 
                    7.85714286 ,     8.57142857 ,     9.28571429 ,    10.          , 
                   10.71428571 ,    11.42857143 ,    12.14285714 ,    12.85714286 , 
                   13.57142857 ,    14.28571429 ,    15.          ] ) 
 
 
 ndarray  object pre-populated with zeros. 
 
 ndarray  object pre-populated with ones. 
 
 The same but taking another  ndarray  object to infer the shape. 
 
 ndarray  object not pre-populated with anything (numbers depend on the bits present in the memory). 
 
 Creates a square matrix as  ndarray  object with diagonal populated by ones. 
 
 Creates a one-dimensional  ndarray  object with evenly spaced intervals between numbers; parameters used are  start ,  end ,  num  (number of elements). 
 

 With all these functions we can provide the following parameters: 
 
 shape 
 
 Either an  int , a sequence of  int +s, or a reference to another +numpy.ndarray 
 
 dtype  (optional) 
 
 A  dtype —these are  NumPy -specific data types for  numpy.ndarray  objects 
 
 order  (optional) 
 
 The order in which to store elements in memory:  C  for  C -like (i.e., row-wise) or  F  for  Fortran -like (i.e., column-wise) 
 
 

 Here, it becomes obvious how  NumPy  specializes the construction of arrays with the  ndarray  class, in comparison to the  list  -based approach: 

 
 
 The  ndarray  object has built-in  dimensions  (axes). 
 
 
 The  ndarray  object is  immutable , its shape is fixed. 
 
 
 It only allows for a  single data type  ( numpy.dtype ) for the whole array. 
 
 

 The  array  class by contrast shares only the characteristic of allowing for unique data type (type code,  dtype ). 

 The role of the  order  parameter is discussed later in the chapter.  Table 4-1  provides an overview of  numpy.dtype  objects (i.e., the basic data types  NumPy  allows). 
 
 Table 4-1.  NumPy dtype objects 
 
 
 dtype 
 Description 
 Example 
 
 
 
 
 t 
 Bit field 
 t4  (4 bits) 
 
 
 b 
 Boolean 
 b  (true or false) 
 
 
 i 
 Integer 
 i8  (64 bit) 
 
 
 u 
 Unsigned integer 
 u8  (64 bit) 
 
 
 f 
 Floating point 
 f8  (64 bit) 
 
 
 c 
 Complex floating point 
 c16  (128 bit) 
 
 
 O 
 Object 
 0  (pointer to object) 
 
 
 S ,  a 
 String 
 S24  (24 characters) 
 
 
 U 
 Unicode 
 U24  (24 Unicode characters) 
 
 
 V 
 Other 
 V12  (12-byte data block) 
 
 
 
 













 
 Meta-Information 

 Every  ndarray  object provides access to a number of useful attributes. 

 In   [ 68 ] :   g . size    
 Out [ 68 ] :   15 
 
 In   [ 69 ] :   g . itemsize    
 Out [ 69 ] :   8 
 
 In   [ 70 ] :   g . ndim    
 Out [ 70 ] :   1 
 
 In   [ 71 ] :   g . shape    
 Out [ 71 ] :   ( 15 , ) 
 
 In   [ 72 ] :   g . dtype    
 Out [ 72 ] :   dtype ( ' float64 ' ) 
 
 In   [ 73 ] :   g . nbytes    
 Out [ 73 ] :   120 
 
 
 The number of elements. 
 
 The number of bytes used to represent one element. 
 
 The number of dimensions. 
 
 The shape of the  ndarray  object. 
 
 The  dtype  of the elements. 
 
 The total number of bytes used in memory. 
 
 













 
 Reshaping and Resizing 

 Although  ndarray  objects are immutable by default, there are multiple options to reshape and resize such an object. While the first operation in general just provides another  view  on the same data, the second operation in general creates a  new  (temporary) object. 

 In   [ 74 ] :   g   =   np . arange ( 15 ) 
 
 In   [ 75 ] :   g 
 Out [ 75 ] :   array ( [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ,    3 ,    4 ,    5 ,    6 ,    7 ,    8 ,    9 ,   10 ,   11 ,   12 ,   13 ,   14 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 76 ] :   g . shape    
 Out [ 76 ] :   ( 15 , ) 
 
 In   [ 77 ] :   np . shape ( g )   
 Out [ 77 ] :   ( 15 , ) 
 
 In   [ 78 ] :   g . reshape ( ( 3 ,   5 ) )    
 Out [ 78 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ,    3 ,    4 ] , 
                  [   5 ,    6 ,    7 ,    8 ,    9 ] , 
                  [ 10 ,   11 ,   12 ,   13 ,   14 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 79 ] :   h   =   g . reshape ( ( 5 ,   3 ) )    
           h 
 Out [ 79 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ] , 
                  [   3 ,    4 ,    5 ] , 
                  [   6 ,    7 ,    8 ] , 
                  [   9 ,   10 ,   11 ] , 
                  [ 12 ,   13 ,   14 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 80 ] :   h . T    
 Out [ 80 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    3 ,    6 ,    9 ,   12 ] , 
                  [   1 ,    4 ,    7 ,   10 ,   13 ] , 
                  [   2 ,    5 ,    8 ,   11 ,   14 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 81 ] :   h . transpose ( )    
 Out [ 81 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    3 ,    6 ,    9 ,   12 ] , 
                  [   1 ,    4 ,    7 ,   10 ,   13 ] , 
                  [   2 ,    5 ,    8 ,   11 ,   14 ] ] ) 
 
 
 The shape of the original  ndarray  object. 
 
 Reshaping to two dimensions (memory view). 
 
 Creating a new object. 
 
 The transpose of the new  ndarray  object. 
 

 During a reshaping operations the total number of elements in the  ndarray  object is unchanged. During a resizing operation, this number changes, i.e. it either decreases (“down-sizing”) or increases (“up-sizing”). 

 In   [ 82 ] :   g 
 Out [ 82 ] :   array ( [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ,    3 ,    4 ,    5 ,    6 ,    7 ,    8 ,    9 ,   10 ,   11 ,   12 ,   13 ,   14 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 83 ] :   np . resize ( g ,   ( 3 ,   1 ) )    
 Out [ 83 ] :   array ( [ [ 0 ] , 
                  [ 1 ] , 
                  [ 2 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 84 ] :   np . resize ( g ,   ( 1 ,   5 ) )    
 Out [ 84 ] :   array ( [ [ 0 ,   1 ,   2 ,   3 ,   4 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 85 ] :   np . resize ( g ,   ( 2 ,   5 ) )    
 Out [ 85 ] :   array ( [ [ 0 ,   1 ,   2 ,   3 ,   4 ] , 
                  [ 5 ,   6 ,   7 ,   8 ,   9 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 86 ] :   n   =   np . resize ( g ,   ( 5 ,   4 ) )    
           n 
 Out [ 86 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ,    3 ] , 
                  [   4 ,    5 ,    6 ,    7 ] , 
                  [   8 ,    9 ,   10 ,   11 ] , 
                  [ 12 ,   13 ,   14 ,    0 ] , 
                  [   1 ,    2 ,    3 ,    4 ] ] ) 
 
 
 Two dimensions, down-sizing. 
 
 Two dimensions, up-sizing. 
 

 Stacking is a special operation that allows the horizontal or vertical combination of two  ndarray  objects. However, the size of the “connecting” dimension must be the same. 

 In   [ 87 ] :   h 
 Out [ 87 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ] , 
                  [   3 ,    4 ,    5 ] , 
                  [   6 ,    7 ,    8 ] , 
                  [   9 ,   10 ,   11 ] , 
                  [ 12 ,   13 ,   14 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 88 ] :   np . hstack ( ( h ,   2   *   h ) )    
 Out [ 88 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ,    0 ,    2 ,    4 ] , 
                  [   3 ,    4 ,    5 ,    6 ,    8 ,   10 ] , 
                  [   6 ,    7 ,    8 ,   12 ,   14 ,   16 ] , 
                  [   9 ,   10 ,   11 ,   18 ,   20 ,   22 ] , 
                  [ 12 ,   13 ,   14 ,   24 ,   26 ,   28 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 89 ] :   np . vstack ( ( h ,   0.5   *   h ) )    
 Out [ 89 ] :   array ( [ [    0.   ,     1.   ,     2.   ] , 
                  [    3.   ,     4.   ,     5.   ] , 
                  [    6.   ,     7.   ,     8.   ] , 
                  [    9.   ,    10.   ,    11.   ] , 
                  [   12.   ,    13.   ,    14.   ] , 
                  [    0.   ,     0.5 ,     1.   ] , 
                  [    1.5 ,     2.   ,     2.5 ] , 
                  [    3.   ,     3.5 ,     4.   ] , 
                  [    4.5 ,     5.   ,     5.5 ] , 
                  [    6.   ,     6.5 ,     7.   ] ] ) 
 
 
 Horizontal stacking of two  ndarray  objects. 
 
 Vertical stacking of two  ndarray  objects. 
 

 Another special operation is the flattening of a multi-dimensional  ndarray  object to a one-dimensional one. One can choose whether the flatting happens row-by-row ( C  order) or column-by-column ( F  order). 

 In   [ 90 ] :   h 
 Out [ 90 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ] , 
                  [   3 ,    4 ,    5 ] , 
                  [   6 ,    7 ,    8 ] , 
                  [   9 ,   10 ,   11 ] , 
                  [ 12 ,   13 ,   14 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 91 ] :   h . flatten ( )    
 Out [ 91 ] :   array ( [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ,    3 ,    4 ,    5 ,    6 ,    7 ,    8 ,    9 ,   10 ,   11 ,   12 ,   13 ,   14 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 92 ] :   h . flatten ( order = ' C ' )    
 Out [ 92 ] :   array ( [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ,    3 ,    4 ,    5 ,    6 ,    7 ,    8 ,    9 ,   10 ,   11 ,   12 ,   13 ,   14 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 93 ] :   h . flatten ( order = ' F ' )    
 Out [ 93 ] :   array ( [   0 ,    3 ,    6 ,    9 ,   12 ,    1 ,    4 ,    7 ,   10 ,   13 ,    2 ,    5 ,    8 ,   11 ,   14 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 94 ] :   for   i   in   h . flat :    
               print ( i ,   end = ' , ' ) 
 
           0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 
 
 In   [ 95 ] :   for   i   in   h . ravel ( order = ' C ' ) :    
               print ( i ,   end = ' , ' ) 
 
           0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 
 
 In   [ 96 ] :   for   i   in   h . ravel ( order = ' F ' ) :    
               print ( i ,   end = ' , ' ) 
 
           0 , 3 , 6 , 9 , 12 , 1 , 4 , 7 , 10 , 13 , 2 , 5 , 8 , 11 , 14 , 
 
 
 The default order for flatting is  C . 
 
 Flattening with  F  order. 
 
 The  flat  attribute provides a flat iterator ( C  order). 
 
 The  ravel()  method is an alternative to  flatten() . 
 
 













 
 Boolean Arrays 

 Comparison and logical operations in general work on  ndarray  objects the same way, element-wise, as on standard Python data types. Evaluating conditions yield by default a Boolean  ndarray  object ( dtype  is  bool ). 

 In   [ 164 ] :   h 
 Out [ 164 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ] , 
                   [   3 ,    4 ,    5 ] , 
                   [   6 ,    7 ,    8 ] , 
                   [   9 ,   10 ,   11 ] , 
                   [ 12 ,   13 ,   14 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 150 ] :   h   >   8    
 Out [ 150 ] :   array ( [ [ False ,   False ,   False ] , 
                   [ False ,   False ,   False ] , 
                   [ False ,   False ,   False ] , 
                   [   True ,    True ,    True ] , 
                   [   True ,    True ,    True ] ] ,   dtype = bool ) 
 
 In   [ 151 ] :   h   < =   7    
 Out [ 151 ] :   array ( [ [   True ,    True ,    True ] , 
                   [   True ,    True ,    True ] , 
                   [   True ,    True ,   False ] , 
                   [ False ,   False ,   False ] , 
                   [ False ,   False ,   False ] ] ,   dtype = bool ) 
 
 In   [ 152 ] :   h   ==   5    
 Out [ 152 ] :   array ( [ [ False ,   False ,   False ] , 
                   [ False ,   False ,    True ] , 
                   [ False ,   False ,   False ] , 
                   [ False ,   False ,   False ] , 
                   [ False ,   False ,   False ] ] ,   dtype = bool ) 
 
 In   [ 158 ] :   ( h   ==   5 ) . astype ( int )    
 Out [ 158 ] :   array ( [ [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ] , 
                   [ 0 ,   0 ,   1 ] , 
                   [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ] , 
                   [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ] , 
                   [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 165 ] :   ( h   >   4 )   &   ( h   < =   12 )    
 Out [ 165 ] :   array ( [ [ False ,   False ,   False ] , 
                   [ False ,   False ,    True ] , 
                   [   True ,    True ,    True ] , 
                   [   True ,    True ,    True ] , 
                   [   True ,   False ,   False ] ] ,   dtype = bool ) 
 
 
 Is value greater than …? 
 
 Is value smaller or equal then …? 
 
 Is value equal to …? 
 
 Present  True  and  False  as integer values 0 and 1. 
 
 Is value greater than … and smaller or equal to …? 
 

 Such Boolean arrays can be used for indexing and data selection. Notice that the following operations flatten the data. 

 In   [ 153 ] :   h [ h   >   8 ]    
 Out [ 153 ] :   array ( [   9 ,   10 ,   11 ,   12 ,   13 ,   14 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 155 ] :   h [ ( h   >   4 )   &   ( h   < =   12 ) ]    
 Out [ 155 ] :   array ( [   5 ,    6 ,    7 ,    8 ,    9 ,   10 ,   11 ,   12 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 157 ] :   h [ ( h   <   4 )   |   ( h   > =   12 ) ]    
 Out [ 157 ] :   array ( [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ,    3 ,   12 ,   13 ,   14 ] ) 
 
 
 Give me all values greater than … 
 
 Give me all values greater than …  and  smaller or equal to … 
 
 Give me all values greater than …  or  smaller or equal to … 
 

 A powerful tool in this regard it the  np.where()  function which allows the definition of actions/operations depending on the whether a condition is  True  or  False . The result of applying  np.where()  is a new  ndarray  object of the same shape as the original one. 

 In   [ 159 ] :   np . where ( h   >   7 ,   1 ,   0 )    
 Out [ 159 ] :   array ( [ [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ] , 
                   [ 0 ,   0 ,   0 ] , 
                   [ 0 ,   0 ,   1 ] , 
                   [ 1 ,   1 ,   1 ] , 
                   [ 1 ,   1 ,   1 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 160 ] :   np . where ( h   %   2   ==   0 ,   ' even ' ,   ' odd ' )    
 Out [ 160 ] :   array ( [ [ ' even ' ,   ' odd ' ,   ' even ' ] , 
                   [ ' odd ' ,   ' even ' ,   ' odd ' ] , 
                   [ ' even ' ,   ' odd ' ,   ' even ' ] , 
                   [ ' odd ' ,   ' even ' ,   ' odd ' ] , 
                   [ ' even ' ,   ' odd ' ,   ' even ' ] ] , 
                  dtype = ' <U4 ' ) 
 
 In   [ 163 ] :   np . where ( h   < =   7 ,   h   *   2 ,   h   /   2 )    
 Out [ 163 ] :   array ( [ [    0.   ,     2.   ,     4.   ] , 
                   [    6.   ,     8.   ,    10.   ] , 
                   [   12.   ,    14.   ,     4.   ] , 
                   [    4.5 ,     5.   ,     5.5 ] , 
                   [    6.   ,     6.5 ,     7.   ] ] ) 
 
 
 In the new object, set  1  if  True  and  0  otherwise. 
 
 In the new object, set  even  if  True  and  odd  otherwise. 
 
 In the new object, set two times the  h  element if  True  and half the  h  element otherwise. 
 

 Later chapters provide more examples for these important operations on  ndarray  objects. 
 













 
 Speed Comparison 

 Before moving on to structured arrays with  NumPy , let us stick with regular arrays for a moment and see what the specialization brings in terms of performance. 

 As a simple example, suppose we want to generate a matrix/array of shape 5,000 × 5,000 elements, populated with (pseudo)random, standard normally distributed numbers. We then want to calculate the sum of all elements. First, the pure  Python  approach, where we make use of  list  comprehensions: 

 In   [ 97 ] :   import   random 
           I   =   5000 
 
 In   [ 98 ] :   % time   mat   =   [ [ random . gauss ( 0 ,   1 )   for   j   in   range ( I ) ]   \
                        for   i   in   range ( I ) ]    
 
           CPU   times :   user   20.9   s ,   sys :   372   ms ,   total :   21.3   s 
           Wall   time :   21.3   s 
 
 
 In   [ 99 ] :   mat [ 0 ] [ : 5 ]    
 Out [ 99 ] :   [ 0.02023704728430644 , 
            - 0.5773300286314157 , 
            - 0.5034574089604074 , 
            - 0.07769332062744054 , 
            - 0.4264012594572326 ] 
 
 In   [ 100 ] :   % time   sum ( [ sum ( l )   for   l   in   mat ] )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   156   ms ,   sys :   1.93   ms ,   total :   158   ms 
            Wall   time :   158   ms 
 
 
 Out [ 100 ] :   681.9120404070142 
 
 In   [ 101 ] :   import   sys 
            sum ( [ sys . getsizeof ( l )   for   l   in   mat ] )    
 Out [ 101 ] :   215200000 
 
 
 The creation of the matrix via a nested list comprehension. 
 
 Some selected random numbers from those drawn. 
 
 The sums of the single  list  objects are first calculated during a list comprehension; then the sum of the sums is taken. 
 
 Adds up the memory usage of all  list  objects. 
 

 Let us now turn to  NumPy  and see how the same problem is solved there. For convenience, the  NumPy  sublibrary  random  offers a multitude of functions to instantiate a  ndarray  object and populate it at the same time with (pseudo)random numbers: 

 In   [ 102 ] :   % time   mat   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( I ,   I ) )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   1.14   s ,   sys :   170   ms ,   total :   1.31   s 
            Wall   time :   1.32   s 
 
 
 In   [ 103 ] :   % time   mat . sum ( )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   29.5   ms ,   sys :   1.32   ms ,   total :   30.8   ms 
            Wall   time :   29.7   ms 
 
 
 Out [ 103 ] :   2643.0006104377485 
 
 In   [ 104 ] :   mat . nbytes    
 Out [ 104 ] :   200000000 
 
 In   [ 105 ] :   sys . getsizeof ( mat )    
 Out [ 105 ] :   200000112 
 
 
 Creates the  ndarray  object with standard normally distributed random numbers; it is faster by a factor of about 20. 
 
 Calculates the sum of all values in the  ndarray  object; it is faster by a factor of 6. 
 
 The  NumPy  approach also saves some memory since the memory overhead of the  ndarray  object is tiny compared to the size of the data itself. 
 

 We observe the following: 
 
 Syntax 
 
 Although we use several approaches to compact the pure  Python  code, the  NumPy  version is even more compact and better readable. 
 
 Performance 
 
 The generation of the  ndarray  object is roughly 20 times faster and the calculation of the sum is roughly 6 times faster than the respective operations in pure  Python . 
 
 
 Using NumPy Arrays 
 The use of  NumPy  for array-based operations and algorithms generally results in compact, easily readable code and significant performance improvements over pure  Python  code. 
 
 





 













 
 Structured NumPy Arrays 

 The specialization of the  ndarray  class obviously brings a number of valuable benefits with it. However, a too-narrow specialization might turn out to be too large a burden to carry for the majority of array-based algorithms and applications. Therefore,  NumPy  provides  structured  or  record   ndarray  objects that allow to have a different  dtype   per column . What does “per column” mean? Consider the following initialization of a structured array object: 

 In   [ 106 ] :   dt   =   np . dtype ( [ ( ' Name ' ,   ' S10 ' ) ,   ( ' Age ' ,   ' i4 ' ) , 
                           ( ' Height ' ,   ' f ' ) ,   ( ' Children/Pets ' ,   ' i4 ' ,   2 ) ] )    
 
 In   [ 107 ] :   dt    
 Out [ 107 ] :   dtype ( [ ( ' Name ' ,   ' S10 ' ) ,   ( ' Age ' ,   ' <i4 ' ) ,   ( ' Height ' ,   ' <f4 ' ) ,   ( ' Children/Pets ' ,   ' <i4 ' ,   ( 2 , ) ) ] ) 
 
 In   [ 108 ] :   dt   =   np . dtype ( { ' names ' :   [ ' Name ' ,   ' Age ' ,   ' Height ' ,   ' Children/Pets ' ] , 
                         ' formats ' : ' O int float int,int ' . split ( ) } )    
 
 In   [ 109 ] :   dt    
 Out [ 109 ] :   dtype ( [ ( ' Name ' ,   ' O ' ) ,   ( ' Age ' ,   ' <i8 ' ) ,   ( ' Height ' ,   ' <f8 ' ) ,   ( ' Children/Pets ' ,   [ ( ' f0 ' ,   ' <i8 ' ) ,   ( ' f1 ' ,   ' <i8 ' ) ] ) ] ) 
 
 In   [ 110 ] :   s   =   np . array ( [ ( ' Smith ' ,   45 ,   1.83 ,   ( 0 ,   1 ) ) , 
                          ( ' Jones ' ,   53 ,   1.72 ,   ( 2 ,   2 ) ) ] ,   dtype = dt )    
 
 In   [ 111 ] :   s    
 Out [ 111 ] :   array ( [ ( ' Smith ' ,   45 ,    1.83 ,   ( 0 ,   1 ) ) ,   ( ' Jones ' ,   53 ,    1.72 ,   ( 2 ,   2 ) ) ] , 
                  dtype = [ ( ' Name ' ,   ' O ' ) ,   ( ' Age ' ,   ' <i8 ' ) ,   ( ' Height ' ,   ' <f8 ' ) ,   ( ' Children/Pets ' ,   [ ( ' f0 ' ,   ' <i8 ' ) ,   ( ' f1 ' ,   ' <i8 ' ) ] ) ] ) 
 
 In   [ 112 ] :   type ( s )    
 Out [ 112 ] :   numpy . ndarray 
 
 
 The complex  dtype  is composed. 
 
 An alternative syntax to achieve the same result. 
 
 The structured  ndarray  is instantiated with two records. 
 
 The object type is still  numpy.ndarray . 
 

 In a sense, this construction comes quite close to the operation for initializing tables in a  SQL  database. We have column names and column data types, with maybe some additional information (e.g., maximum number of characters per  string  object). The single columns can now be easily accessed by their names and the rows by their index values: 

 In   [ 113 ] :   s [ ' Name ' ]    
 Out [ 113 ] :   array ( [ ' Smith ' ,   ' Jones ' ] ,   dtype = object ) 
 
 In   [ 114 ] :   s [ ' Height ' ] . mean ( )    
 Out [ 114 ] :   1.7749999999999999 
 
 In   [ 115 ] :   s [ 0 ]    
 Out [ 115 ] :   ( ' Smith ' ,   45 ,    1.83 ,   ( 0 ,   1 ) ) 
 
 In   [ 116 ] :   s [ 1 ] [ ' Age ' ]    
 Out [ 116 ] :   53 
 
 
 Selecting a column by name. 
 
 Calling a method on a selected column. 
 
 Selecting a record. 
 
 Selecting a field in a record. 
 

 In summary, structured arrays are a generalization of the regular  numpy.ndarray  object types in that the data type only has to be the same  per column , as one is used to in the context of tables in  SQL  databases. One advantage of structured arrays is that a single element of a column can be another multidimensional object and does not have to conform to the basic  NumPy  data types. 
 Structured Arrays 
 NumPy  provides, in addition to regular arrays, structured (record) arrays that allow the description and handling of table-like data structures with a variety of different data types per (named) column. They bring  SQL  table-like data structures to  Python , with most of the benefits of regular  ndarray  objects (syntax, methods, performance). 
 
 













 
 Vectorization of Code 

 Vectorization of code is a strategy to get more compact code that is possibly executed faster. The fundamental idea is to conduct an operation on or to apply a function to a complex object “at once” and not by looping over the single elements of the object. In  Python , functional programming tools such as  map  and  filter  provide some basic means for vectorization. However,  NumPy  has vectorization built in deep down in its core. 








 
 Basic Vectorization 

 As we learned in the previous section, simple mathematical operations — such as calculating the sum over all elements — can be implemented on  ndarray  objects directly (via methods or universal functions). More general vectorized operations are also possible. For example, we can add two  NumPy  arrays element-wise as follows: 

 In   [ 117 ] :   np . random . seed ( 100 ) 
            r   =   np . arange ( 12 ) . reshape ( ( 4 ,   3 ) )    
            s   =   np . arange ( 12 ) . reshape ( ( 4 ,   3 ) )   *   0.5    
 
 In   [ 118 ] :   r    
 Out [ 118 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ] , 
                   [   3 ,    4 ,    5 ] , 
                   [   6 ,    7 ,    8 ] , 
                   [   9 ,   10 ,   11 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 119 ] :   s    
 Out [ 119 ] :   array ( [ [   0.   ,    0.5 ,    1.   ] , 
                   [   1.5 ,    2.   ,    2.5 ] , 
                   [   3.   ,    3.5 ,    4.   ] , 
                   [   4.5 ,    5.   ,    5.5 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 120 ] :   r   +   s    
 Out [ 120 ] :   array ( [ [    0.   ,     1.5 ,     3.   ] , 
                   [    4.5 ,     6.   ,     7.5 ] , 
                   [    9.   ,    10.5 ,    12.   ] , 
                   [   13.5 ,    15.   ,    16.5 ] ] ) 
 
 
 The first  ndarray  object with random numbers. 
 
 The second  ndarray  object with random numbers. 
 
 Element-wise addition as an vectorized operation (no looping). 
 

 NumPy  also supports what is called  broadcasting . This allows to combine objects of different shape within a single operation. We have already made use of this before. Consider the following examples: 

 In   [ 121 ] :   r   +   3    
 Out [ 121 ] :   array ( [ [   3 ,    4 ,    5 ] , 
                   [   6 ,    7 ,    8 ] , 
                   [   9 ,   10 ,   11 ] , 
                   [ 12 ,   13 ,   14 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 122 ] :   2   *   r    
 Out [ 122 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    2 ,    4 ] , 
                   [   6 ,    8 ,   10 ] , 
                   [ 12 ,   14 ,   16 ] , 
                   [ 18 ,   20 ,   22 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 123 ] :   2   *   r   +   3    
 Out [ 123 ] :   array ( [ [   3 ,    5 ,    7 ] , 
                   [   9 ,   11 ,   13 ] , 
                   [ 15 ,   17 ,   19 ] , 
                   [ 21 ,   23 ,   25 ] ] ) 
 
 
 During scalar addition, the scalar is broadcast and added to every element. 
 
 During scalar multiplication, the scalar is also broadcast to and multiplied with every element. 
 
 This linear transformation combines both operations. 
 

 These operations work with differently shaped  ndarray  objects as well, up to a certain point: 

 In   [ 124 ] :   r 
 Out [ 124 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ] , 
                   [   3 ,    4 ,    5 ] , 
                   [   6 ,    7 ,    8 ] , 
                   [   9 ,   10 ,   11 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 125 ] :   r . shape 
 Out [ 125 ] :   ( 4 ,   3 ) 
 
 In   [ 126 ] :   s   =   np . arange ( 0 ,   12 ,   4 )    
            s    
 Out [ 126 ] :   array ( [ 0 ,   4 ,   8 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 127 ] :   r   +   s    
 Out [ 127 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    5 ,   10 ] , 
                   [   3 ,    8 ,   13 ] , 
                   [   6 ,   11 ,   16 ] , 
                   [   9 ,   14 ,   19 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 128 ] :   s   =   np . arange ( 0 ,   12 ,   3 )    
            s    
 Out [ 128 ] :   array ( [ 0 ,   3 ,   6 ,   9 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 129 ] :   # r + s   
 
 In   [ 130 ] :   r . transpose ( )   +   s    
 Out [ 130 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    6 ,   12 ,   18 ] , 
                   [   1 ,    7 ,   13 ,   19 ] , 
                   [   2 ,    8 ,   14 ,   20 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 131 ] :   sr   =   s . reshape ( - 1 ,   1 )    
            sr 
 Out [ 131 ] :   array ( [ [ 0 ] , 
                   [ 3 ] , 
                   [ 6 ] , 
                   [ 9 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 132 ] :   sr . shape    
 Out [ 132 ] :   ( 4 ,   1 ) 
 
 In   [ 133 ] :   r   +   s . reshape ( - 1 ,   1 )    
 Out [ 133 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ] , 
                   [   6 ,    7 ,    8 ] , 
                   [ 12 ,   13 ,   14 ] , 
                   [ 18 ,   19 ,   20 ] ] ) 
 
 
 A new one-dimensional  ndarray  object of length 3. 
 
 The  r  (matrix) and  s  (vector) objects can be added straightforwardly. 
 
 Another one-dimensional  ndarray  object of length 4. 
 
 The length of the new  s  (vector) object is now different from the length of the second dimension of the  r  object. 
 
 Transposing the  r  object again allows for the vectorized addition. 
 
 Alternatively, the shape of  s  can be changed to  (4, 1)  to make the addition work (the results are different, however). 
 

 As a general rule, custom-defined  Python  functions work with  numpy.ndarray s as well. If the implementation allows, arrays can be used with functions just as  int  or  float  objects can. Consider the following function: 

 In   [ 134 ] :   def   f ( x ) : 
                return   3   *   x   +   5    
 
 In   [ 135 ] :   f ( 0.5 )    
 Out [ 135 ] :   6.5 
 
 In   [ 136 ] :   f ( r )    
 Out [ 136 ] :   array ( [ [   5 ,    8 ,   11 ] , 
                   [ 14 ,   17 ,   20 ] , 
                   [ 23 ,   26 ,   29 ] , 
                   [ 32 ,   35 ,   38 ] ] ) 
 
 
 A simple Python function implementing a linear transform on parameter  x . 
 
 The function  f  applied to a Python  float  object. 
 
 The same function applied to a  ndarray  object, resulting in a vectorized and element-wise evaluation of the function. 
 

 What  NumPy  does is to simply apply the function  f  to the object element-wise. In that sense, by using this kind of operation we do  not  avoid loops; we only avoid them on the  Python  level and delegate the looping to  NumPy . On the  NumPy  level, looping over the  ndarray  object is taken care of by highly optimized code, most of it written in  C  and therefore generally much faster than pure  Python . This explains the “secret” behind the performance benefits of using  NumPy  for array-based use cases. 
 













 
 Memory Layout 

 When we first initialized  numpy.ndarray  objects by using  np.zero , we provided an optional argument for the memory layout. This argument specifies, roughly speaking, which elements of an array get stored in memory next to each other (contiguously). When working with small arrays, this has hardly any measurable impact on the performance of array operations. However, when arrays get large and depending on the (financial) algorithm to be implemented on them the story might be different. This is when  memory layout  comes into play (see, for instance  Memory Layout of Multi-Dimensional Arrays .) 

 To illustrate the potential importance of the memory layout of arrays in science and finance, consider the following construction of multidimensional  ndarray  objects: 

 In   [ 137 ] :   x   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( 1000000 ,   5 ) )    
 
 In   [ 138 ] :   y   =   2   *   x   +   3    
 
 In   [ 139 ] :   C   =   np . array ( ( x ,   y ) ,   order = ' C ' )    
 
 In   [ 140 ] :   F   =   np . array ( ( x ,   y ) ,   order = ' F ' )    
 
 In   [ 141 ] :   x   =   0.0 ;   y   =   0.0    
 
 In   [ 142 ] :   C [ : 2 ] . round ( 2 )    
 Out [ 142 ] :   array ( [ [ [ - 1.75 ,    0.34 ,    1.15 ,   - 0.25 ,    0.98 ] , 
                    [   0.51 ,    0.22 ,   - 1.07 ,   - 0.19 ,    0.26 ] , 
                    [ - 0.46 ,    0.44 ,   - 0.58 ,    0.82 ,    0.67 ] , 
                    . . . , 
                    [ - 0.05 ,    0.14 ,    0.17 ,    0.33 ,    1.39 ] , 
                    [   1.02 ,    0.3   ,   - 1.23 ,   - 0.68 ,   - 0.87 ] , 
                    [   0.83 ,   - 0.73 ,    1.03 ,    0.34 ,   - 0.46 ] ] , 
 
                   [ [ - 0.5   ,    3.69 ,    5.31 ,    2.5   ,    4.96 ] , 
                    [   4.03 ,    3.44 ,    0.86 ,    2.62 ,    3.51 ] , 
                    [   2.08 ,    3.87 ,    1.83 ,    4.63 ,    4.35 ] , 
                    . . . , 
                    [   2.9   ,    3.28 ,    3.33 ,    3.67 ,    5.78 ] , 
                    [   5.04 ,    3.6   ,    0.54 ,    1.65 ,    1.26 ] , 
                    [   4.67 ,    1.54 ,    5.06 ,    3.69 ,    2.07 ] ] ] ) 
 
 
 A  ndarray  object with large asymmetry in the two dimensions. 
 
 A linear transform of the original object data. 
 
 This creates a two-dimensional  ndarray  object with  C  order (row-major). 
 
 This creates a two-dimensional  ndarray  object with  F  order (column-major). 
 
 Memory is freed up (contingent on garbage collection). 
 
 Some numbers from the  C  object. 
 

 Let’s look at some really fundamental examples and use cases for both types of  ndarray  objects and consider the speed with which they are executed given the different memory layouts: 

 In   [ 143 ] :   % timeit   C . sum ( )    
 
            4.65   ms   ±   73.3   µ s   per   loop   ( mean   ±   std .   dev .   of   7   runs ,   100   loops   each ) 
 
 
 In   [ 144 ] :   % timeit   F . sum ( )    
 
            4.56   ms   ±   105   µ s   per   loop   ( mean   ±   std .   dev .   of   7   runs ,   100   loops   each ) 
 
 
 In   [ 145 ] :   % timeit   C . sum ( axis = 0 )    
 
            20.9   ms   ±   358   µ s   per   loop   ( mean   ±   std .   dev .   of   7   runs ,   10   loops   each ) 
 
 
 In   [ 146 ] :   % timeit   C . sum ( axis = 1 )    
 
            38.5   ms   ±   1.1   ms   per   loop   ( mean   ±   std .   dev .   of   7   runs ,   10   loops   each ) 
 
 
 In   [ 147 ] :   % timeit   F . sum ( axis = 0 )    
 
            87.5   ms   ±   1.37   ms   per   loop   ( mean   ±   std .   dev .   of   7   runs ,   10   loops   each ) 
 
 
 In   [ 148 ] :   % timeit   F . sum ( axis = 1 )    
 
            81.6   ms   ±   1.66   ms   per   loop   ( mean   ±   std .   dev .   of   7   runs ,   10   loops   each ) 
 
 
 In   [ 149 ] :   F   =   0.0 ;   C   =   0.0 
 
 
 Calculates the sum over all elements. 
 
 Calculates the sums per row (“many”). 
 
 Calculates the sums per columns (“few”). 
 

 We can summarize the performance results as follows: 

 
 
 When calculating the sum over  all elements , the memory layout does not really matter. 
 
 
 The summing up over the  C -ordered  ndarray  objects is faster both over rows as well as columns ( absolute  speed advantage). 
 
 
 With the  C -ordered (row-major)  ndarray  object, summing up over rows is  relatively  faster compared to summing up over columns. 
 
 
 With the  F -ordered (column-major)  ndarray  object, summing up over columns is  relatively  faster compared to summing up over rows. 
 
 
 





 













 
 Conclusions 

 NumPy  is the package of choice for numerical computing in Python. The  ndarray  class is a class specifically designed to be convenient and efficient in the handling of (large) numerical data. Powerful methods and  NumPy ’s universal functions allow for vectorized code the mostly avoids slow loops on the Python level. Many approaches introduced in this chapter carry over to  pandas  and its  DataFrame  class as well (see  Chapter 5 ) 
 













 
 Further Resources 

 Helpful resources are provided under: 

 
 
 http://www.numpy.org/ 
 
 

 Excellent introductions to  NumPy  in book form are: 

 
 
 McKinney, Wes (2017):  Python for Data Analysis . 2nd ed., O’Reilly, Beijing et al. 
 
 
 VanderPlas, Jake (2016):  Python Data Science Handbook . O’Reilly, Beijing et al. 
 
 
 







 
 
 



 
 
   
   
 Chapter 5.  Data Analysis with pandas 

 
 Data! Data! Data! I can’t make bricks without clay! 
 Sherlock Holmes 
 






 
 Introduction 

 This chapter is about  pandas  a library for data analysis with a focus on tabular data.  pandas  has become a powerful tool over the recent years which not only brings powerful classes and functionalities, but does also a great job in wrapping existing functionality from other packages. The result is a user interface that makes data analysis, and in particular financial analytics, a convenient and efficient task. 

 At the core of  pandas  and this chapter is the  DataFrame , a class to efficiently handle data in tabular form, i.e. data characterized by an organization along columns. To this end, the  DataFrame  class provides, for instance, column labeling as well as flexible indexing capabilities for the rows (records) of the data set — similar to a table in a relational database or an Excel spreadsheet. 

 The chapter covers the following fundamental data structures: 
 

 
 
 object type 
 meaning 
 usage/model for 
 
 
 
 
 DataFrame 
 2-dimensional data object with index 
 tabular data organized in columns 
 
 
 Series 
 1-dimensional data object with index 
 single (time) series of data 
 
 
 

 The chapter is organized as follows: 
 
 “DataFrame Class” 
 
 The chapter starts by exploring the basic characteristics and capabilities of the  DataFrame  class of  pandas  by using simple and small data sets; it then proceeds by using a  NumPy   ndarray  object and transforming this to a  DataFrame  object. 
 
 “Basic Analytics”  and  “Basic Visualization” 
 
 Basic analytics and visualization capabilities are also illustrated in this chapter, although later chapters go deeper in this regard. 
 
 “Series Class” 
 
 A rather brief section covers the  Series  class of  pandas , which, in a sense, represents a special case of the  DataFrame  class with a single column of data only. 
 
 “GroupBy Operations” 
 
 One of the strengths of the  DataFrame  class lies in grouping data according to a single or multiple columns. 
 
 “Complex Selection” 
 
 The usage of (complex) conditions allows for the easy selection of data from a  DataFrame  object. 
 
 “Concatenation, Joining and Merging” 
 
 The concatenation, joining and merging of different data sets into one is an important operation in data analysis.  pandas  provides different options to accomplish such a task. 
 
 “Performance Aspects” 
 
 As with Python in general,  pandas  provides multiple options in general to accomplish the same goal. This section takes a brief look at potential performance differences. 
 
 
 













 
 DataFrame Class 

 This section covers some fundamental aspects of the  DataFrame  class. The class is that complex and powerful that only fraction of the capabilities can be presented here. Subsequent chapters provide more examples and shed light on different aspects. 








 
 First Steps with DataFrame Class 

 On a rather fundamental level, the  DataFrame  class is designed to manage indexed and labeled data, not too different from a  SQL  database table or a worksheet in a spreadsheet application. Consider the following creation of a  DataFrame  object: 

 In   [ 1 ] :   import   pandas   as   pd    
 
 In   [ 2 ] :   df   =   pd . DataFrame ( [ 10 ,   20 ,   30 ,   40 ] ,    
                            columns = [ ' numbers ' ] ,    
                            index = [ ' a ' ,   ' b ' ,   ' c ' ,   ' d ' ] )    
 
 In   [ 3 ] :   df    
 Out [ 3 ] :      numbers 
          a         10 
          b         20 
          c         30 
          d         40 
 
 
 Imports  pandas . 
 
 Defines the data as a  list  object. 
 
 Specifies the column label. 
 
 Specifies the index values/labels. 
 
 Shows the data as well as column and index labels of  DataFrame  object. 
 

 This simple example already shows some major features of the  DataFrame  class when it comes to storing data: 
 
 Data 
 
 Data itself can be provided in different shapes and types ( list ,  tuple ,  ndarray , and  dict  objects are candidates). 
 
 Labels 
 
 Data is organized in columns, which can have custom names. 
 
 Index 
 
 There is an index that can take on different formats (e.g., numbers, strings, time information). 
 
 

 Working with such a  DataFrame  object is in general pretty convenient and efficient, e.g., compared to regular  ndarray  objects, which are more specialized and more restricted when you want to do something like enlarging an existing object. The following are simple examples showing how typical operations on a  DataFrame  object work: 

 In   [ 4 ] :   df . index    
 Out [ 4 ] :   Index ( [ ' a ' ,   ' b ' ,   ' c ' ,   ' d ' ] ,   dtype = ' object ' ) 
 
 In   [ 5 ] :   df . columns    
 Out [ 5 ] :   Index ( [ ' numbers ' ] ,   dtype = ' object ' ) 
 
 In   [ 6 ] :   df . loc [ ' c ' ]    
 Out [ 6 ] :   numbers      30 
          Name :   c ,   dtype :   int64 
 
 In   [ 7 ] :   df . loc [ [ ' a ' ,   ' d ' ] ]    
 Out [ 7 ] :      numbers 
          a         10 
          d         40 
 
 In   [ 8 ] :   df . iloc [ 1 : 3 ]    
 Out [ 8 ] :      numbers 
          b         20 
          c         30 
 
 In   [ 9 ] :   df . sum ( )    
 Out [ 9 ] :   numbers      100 
          dtype :   int64 
 
 In   [ 10 ] :   df . apply ( lambda   x :   x   * *   2 )    
 Out [ 10 ] :      numbers 
           a        100 
           b        400 
           c        900 
           d       1600 
 
 In   [ 11 ] :   df   * *   2    
 Out [ 11 ] :      numbers 
           a        100 
           b        400 
           c        900 
           d       1600 
 
 
 The  index  attribute and  Index  object. 
 
 The  columns  attribute and  Index  object. 
 
 Selects the value corresponding to index  c . 
 
 Selects the two values corresponding to indices  a  and  d . 
 
 Selects the second and third rows via the index positions. 
 
 Calculates the sum over the single column. 
 
 Uses the  apply()  method to calculate squares in vectorized fashion. 
 
 Applies vectorization directly as with  ndarray  objects. 
 

 Contrary to  NumPy   ndarray  objects, enlarging the  DataFrame  object in both dimensions is possible: 

 In   [ 12 ] :   df [ ' floats ' ]   =   ( 1.5 ,   2.5 ,   3.5 ,   4.5 )    
 
 In   [ 13 ] :   df 
 Out [ 13 ] :      numbers    floats 
           a         10       1.5 
           b         20       2.5 
           c         30       3.5 
           d         40       4.5 
 
 In   [ 14 ] :   df [ ' floats ' ]    
 Out [ 14 ] :   a      1.5 
           b      2.5 
           c      3.5 
           d      4.5 
           Name :   floats ,   dtype :   float64 
 
 
 Adds a new columns with  float  objects provided as a  tuple  object. 
 
 Selects this column and shows its data and index labels. 
 

 A whole  DataFrame  object can also be taken to define a new column. In such a case, indices are aligned automatically: 

 In   [ 15 ] :   df [ ' names ' ]   =   pd . DataFrame ( [ ' Yves ' ,   ' Sandra ' ,   ' Lilli ' ,   ' Henry ' ] , 
                                      index = [ ' d ' ,   ' a ' ,   ' b ' ,   ' c ' ] )    
 
 In   [ 16 ] :   df 
 Out [ 16 ] :      numbers    floats     names 
           a         10       1.5    Sandra 
           b         20       2.5     Lilli 
           c         30       3.5     Henry 
           d         40       4.5      Yves 
 
 
 Another new column is created based on a  DataFrame  object. 
 

 Appending data works similarly. However, in the following example we see a side effect that is usually to be avoided—the index gets replaced by a simple range index: 

 In   [ 17 ] :   df . append ( { ' numbers ' :   100 ,   ' floats ' :   5.75 ,   ' names ' :   ' Jil ' } , 
                          ignore_index = True )    
 Out [ 17 ] :      numbers    floats     names 
           0         10      1.50    Sandra 
           1         20      2.50     Lilli 
           2         30      3.50     Henry 
           3         40      4.50      Yves 
           4        100      5.75       Jil 
 
 In   [ 18 ] :   df   =   df . append ( pd . DataFrame ( { ' numbers ' :   100 ,   ' floats ' :   5.75 , 
                                        ' names ' :   ' Jil ' } ,   index = [ ' y ' , ] ) )    
 
 In   [ 19 ] :   df 
 Out [ 19 ] :      floats     names    numbers 
           a      1.50    Sandra         10 
           b      2.50     Lilli         20 
           c      3.50     Henry         30 
           d      4.50      Yves         40 
           y      5.75       Jil        100 
 
 In   [ 20 ] :   df   =   df . append ( pd . DataFrame ( { ' names ' :   ' Liz ' } ,   index = [ ' z ' , ] ) )    
 
 In   [ 21 ] :   df 
 Out [ 21 ] :      floats     names    numbers 
           a      1.50    Sandra       10.0 
           b      2.50     Lilli       20.0 
           c      3.50     Henry       30.0 
           d      4.50      Yves       40.0 
           y      5.75       Jil      100.0 
           z       NaN       Liz        NaN 
 
 In   [ 22 ] :   df . dtypes    
 Out [ 22 ] :   floats       float64 
           names         object 
           numbers      float64 
           dtype :   object 
 
 
 Appends a new row via a  dict  object; this is a temporary operation during which index information gets lost. 
 
 This appends the row based on a  DataFrame  object with index information; the original index information is preserved. 
 
 This appends an incomplete data row to the  DataFrame  objects, resulting in  NaN  values. 
 
 The different  dtypes  of the single columns; this is similar to record arrays with  NumPy . 
 

 Although there are now missing values, the majority of method calls will still work. For example: 

 In   [ 23 ] :   df [ [ ' numbers ' ,   ' floats ' ] ] . mean ( )    
 Out [ 23 ] :   numbers      40.00 
           floats        3.55 
           dtype :   float64 
 
 In   [ 24 ] :   df [ [ ' numbers ' ,   ' floats ' ] ] . std ( )    
 Out [ 24 ] :   numbers      35.355339 
           floats        1.662077 
           dtype :   float64 
 
 
 The mean over the two columns specified (ignoring rows with  NaN  values). 
 
 The standard deviation over the two columns specified (ignoring rows with  NaN  values). 
 
 













 
 Second Steps with DataFrame Class 

 The example in this sub-section is based on a  ndarray  object with standard normally distributed random numbers. It explores further features such as a  DatetimeIndex  to manage time series data. 

 In   [ 25 ]:   import   numpy   as   np 

 In   [ 26 ]:   np . random . seed ( 100 ) 

 In   [ 27 ]:   a   =   np . random . standard_normal (( 9 ,   4 )) 

 In   [ 28 ]:   a 
 Out [ 28 ]:   array ([[ - 1.74976547 ,    0.3426804   ,    1.1530358   ,   - 0.25243604 ], 
                 [   0.98132079 ,    0.51421884 ,    0.22117967 ,   - 1.07004333 ], 
                 [ - 0.18949583 ,    0.25500144 ,   - 0.45802699 ,    0.43516349 ], 
                 [ - 0.58359505 ,    0.81684707 ,    0.67272081 ,   - 0.10441114 ], 
                 [ - 0.53128038 ,    1.02973269 ,   - 0.43813562 ,   - 1.11831825 ], 
                 [   1.61898166 ,    1.54160517 ,   - 0.25187914 ,   - 0.84243574 ], 
                 [   0.18451869 ,    0.9370822   ,    0.73100034 ,    1.36155613 ], 
                 [ - 0.32623806 ,    0.05567601 ,    0.22239961 ,   - 1.443217    ], 
                 [ - 0.75635231 ,    0.81645401 ,    0.75044476 ,   - 0.45594693 ]]) 

 Although you can construct  DataFrame  objects more directly (as we have seen before), using an  ndarray  object is generally a good choice since  pandas  will retain the basic structure and will “only” add meta-information (e.g., index values). It also represents a typical use case for financial applications and scientific research in general. For example: 

 In   [ 29 ] :   df   =   pd . DataFrame ( a )    
 
 In   [ 30 ] :   df 
 Out [ 30 ] :             0           1           2           3 
           0   - 1.749765    0.342680    1.153036   - 0.252436 
           1    0.981321    0.514219    0.221180   - 1.070043 
           2   - 0.189496    0.255001   - 0.458027    0.435163 
           3   - 0.583595    0.816847    0.672721   - 0.104411 
           4   - 0.531280    1.029733   - 0.438136   - 1.118318 
           5    1.618982    1.541605   - 0.251879   - 0.842436 
           6    0.184519    0.937082    0.731000    1.361556 
           7   - 0.326238    0.055676    0.222400   - 1.443217 
           8   - 0.756352    0.816454    0.750445   - 0.455947 
 
 
 Creates a  DataFrame  object from the  ndarray  object. 
 

 Table 5-1  lists the parameters that the  DataFrame  function takes. In the table, “array-like” means a data structure similar to an  ndarray  object—a  list , for example.  Index  is an instance of the  pandas   Index  class. 
 
 Table 5-1.  Parameters of DataFrame function 
 
 
 Parameter 
 Format 
 Description 
 
 
 
 
 data 
 ndarray / dict / DataFrame 
 Data for  DataFrame ;  dict  can contain  Series , + ndarray +s, + list +s 
 
 
 index 
 Index /array-like 
 Index to use; defaults to  range(n) 
 
 
 columns 
 Index /array-like 
 Column headers to use; defaults to  range(n) 
 
 
 dtype 
 dtype , default  None 
 Data type to use/force; otherwise, it is inferred 
 
 
 copy 
 bool , default  None 
 Copy data from inputs 
 
 
 

 As with structured arrays, and as we have already seen,  DataFrame  objects have column names that can be defined directly by assigning a  list  with the right number of elements. This illustrates that you can define/change the attributes of the  DataFrame  object as  you go: 

 In   [ 31 ] :   df . columns   =   [ ' No1 ' ,   ' No2 ' ,   ' No3 ' ,   ' No4 ' ]    
 
 In   [ 32 ] :   df 
 Out [ 32 ] :           No1         No2         No3         No4 
           0   - 1.749765    0.342680    1.153036   - 0.252436 
           1    0.981321    0.514219    0.221180   - 1.070043 
           2   - 0.189496    0.255001   - 0.458027    0.435163 
           3   - 0.583595    0.816847    0.672721   - 0.104411 
           4   - 0.531280    1.029733   - 0.438136   - 1.118318 
           5    1.618982    1.541605   - 0.251879   - 0.842436 
           6    0.184519    0.937082    0.731000    1.361556 
           7   - 0.326238    0.055676    0.222400   - 1.443217 
           8   - 0.756352    0.816454    0.750445   - 0.455947 
 
 In   [ 33 ] :   df [ ' No2 ' ] . mean ( )    
 Out [ 33 ] :   0.70103309414564585 
 
 
 Specifies the column labels via a  list  object. 
 
 Picking a column is now made easy. 
 

 To work with financial time series data efficiently, you must be able to handle time indices well. This can also be considered a major strength of  pandas . For example, assume that our nine data entries in the four columns correspond to month-end data, beginning in January 2019. A  DatetimeIndex  object is then generated with the  date_range()  function as follows: 

 In   [ 34 ] :   dates   =   pd . date_range ( ' 2019-1-1 ' ,   periods = 9 ,   freq = ' M ' )    
 
 In   [ 35 ] :   dates 
 Out [ 35 ] :   DatetimeIndex ( [ ' 2019-01-31 ' ,   ' 2019-02-28 ' ,   ' 2019-03-31 ' ,   ' 2019-04-30 ' , 
                          ' 2019-05-31 ' ,   ' 2019-06-30 ' ,   ' 2019-07-31 ' ,   ' 2019-08-31 ' , 
                          ' 2019-09-30 ' ] , 
                         dtype = ' datetime64[ns] ' ,   freq = ' M ' ) 
 
 
 Creates a  DatetimeIndex  object. 
 

 Table 5-2  lists the parameters that the  date_range  function takes. 
 
 Table 5-2.  Parameters of date_range function 
 
 
 Parameter 
 Format 
 Description 
 
 
 
 
 start 
 string / datetime 
 left bound for generating dates 
 
 
 end 
 string / datetime 
 right bound for generating dates 
 
 
 periods 
 integer / None 
 number of periods (if  start  or  end  is  None ) 
 
 
 freq 
 string / DateOffset 
 frequency string, e.g.,  5D  for 5 days 
 
 
 tz 
 string / None 
 time zone name for localized index 
 
 
 normalize 
 bool , default  None 
 normalize  start  and  end  to midnight 
 
 
 name 
 string , default  None 
 name of resulting index 
 
 
 

 The following code defines the just created  DatetimeIndex  object as the relevant index object, making a time series of the original data set: 

 In   [ 36 ]:   df . index   =   dates 

 In   [ 37 ]:   df 
 Out [ 37 ]:                    No1         No2         No3         No4 
          2019 - 01 - 31   - 1.749765    0.342680    1.153036   - 0.252436 
          2019 - 02 - 28    0.981321    0.514219    0.221180   - 1.070043 
          2019 - 03 - 31   - 0.189496    0.255001   - 0.458027    0.435163 
          2019 - 04 - 30   - 0.583595    0.816847    0.672721   - 0.104411 
          2019 - 05 - 31   - 0.531280    1.029733   - 0.438136   - 1.118318 
          2019 - 06 - 30    1.618982    1.541605   - 0.251879   - 0.842436 
          2019 - 07 - 31    0.184519    0.937082    0.731000    1.361556 
          2019 - 08 - 31   - 0.326238    0.055676    0.222400   - 1.443217 
          2019 - 09 - 30   - 0.756352    0.816454    0.750445   - 0.455947 

 When it comes to the generation of  DatetimeIndex  objects with the help of the  date_range  function, there are a number of choices for the frequency parameter  freq .  Table 5-3  lists all the options. 
 
 Table 5-3.  Frequency parameter values for date_range function 
 
 
 Alias 
 Description 
 
 
 
 
 B 
 Business day frequency 
 
 
 C 
 Custom business day frequency (experimental) 
 
 
 D 
 Calendar day frequency 
 
 
 W 
 Weekly frequency 
 
 
 M 
 Month end frequency 
 
 
 BM 
 Business month end frequency 
 
 
 MS 
 Month start frequency 
 
 
 BMS 
 Business month start frequency 
 
 
 Q 
 Quarter end frequency 
 
 
 BQ 
 Business quarter end frequency 
 
 
 QS 
 Quarter start frequency 
 
 
 BQS 
 Business quarter start frequency 
 
 
 A 
 Year end frequency 
 
 
 BA 
 Business year end frequency 
 
 
 AS 
 Year start frequency 
 
 
 BAS 
 Business year start frequency 
 
 
 H 
 Hourly frequency 
 
 
 T 
 Minutely frequency 
 
 
 S 
 Secondly frequency 
 
 
 L 
 Milliseconds 
 
 
 U 
 Microseconds 
 
 
 

 In some circumstances, it pays off to have access to the original data set in the form of the  ndarray  object. The  values  attribute, for instance, provides direct access to it. 

 In   [ 38 ]:   df . values 
 Out [ 38 ]:   array ([[ - 1.74976547 ,    0.3426804   ,    1.1530358   ,   - 0.25243604 ], 
                 [   0.98132079 ,    0.51421884 ,    0.22117967 ,   - 1.07004333 ], 
                 [ - 0.18949583 ,    0.25500144 ,   - 0.45802699 ,    0.43516349 ], 
                 [ - 0.58359505 ,    0.81684707 ,    0.67272081 ,   - 0.10441114 ], 
                 [ - 0.53128038 ,    1.02973269 ,   - 0.43813562 ,   - 1.11831825 ], 
                 [   1.61898166 ,    1.54160517 ,   - 0.25187914 ,   - 0.84243574 ], 
                 [   0.18451869 ,    0.9370822   ,    0.73100034 ,    1.36155613 ], 
                 [ - 0.32623806 ,    0.05567601 ,    0.22239961 ,   - 1.443217    ], 
                 [ - 0.75635231 ,    0.81645401 ,    0.75044476 ,   - 0.45594693 ]]) 

 In   [ 39 ]:   np . array ( df ) 
 Out [ 39 ]:   array ([[ - 1.74976547 ,    0.3426804   ,    1.1530358   ,   - 0.25243604 ], 
                 [   0.98132079 ,    0.51421884 ,    0.22117967 ,   - 1.07004333 ], 
                 [ - 0.18949583 ,    0.25500144 ,   - 0.45802699 ,    0.43516349 ], 
                 [ - 0.58359505 ,    0.81684707 ,    0.67272081 ,   - 0.10441114 ], 
                 [ - 0.53128038 ,    1.02973269 ,   - 0.43813562 ,   - 1.11831825 ], 
                 [   1.61898166 ,    1.54160517 ,   - 0.25187914 ,   - 0.84243574 ], 
                 [   0.18451869 ,    0.9370822   ,    0.73100034 ,    1.36155613 ], 
                 [ - 0.32623806 ,    0.05567601 ,    0.22239961 ,   - 1.443217    ], 
                 [ - 0.75635231 ,    0.81645401 ,    0.75044476 ,   - 0.45594693 ]]) 
 Arrays and DataFrames 
 You can generate a  DataFrame  object in general from an  ndarray  object. But you can also easily generate an  ndarray  object out of a  DataFrame  by using the  values  attribute of the  DataFrame  class or the function  np.array()  of  NumPy . 
 
 





 













 
 Basic Analytics 

 Like  NumPy   ndarray  objects, the  pandas   DataFrame  class has built in a multitude of convenience methods. As a starter, consider the methods  info()  and +describe(). 

 In   [ 40 ] :   df . info ( )    
 
           < class   ' pandas . core . frame . DataFrame ' > 
           DatetimeIndex :   9   entries ,   2019 - 01 - 31   to   2019 - 09 - 30 
           Freq :   M 
           Data   columns   ( total   4   columns ) : 
           No1      9   non - null   float64 
           No2      9   non - null   float64 
           No3      9   non - null   float64 
           No4      9   non - null   float64 
           dtypes :   float64 ( 4 ) 
           memory   usage :   360.0   bytes 
 
 
 In   [ 41 ] :   df . describe ( )    
 Out [ 41 ] :               No1         No2         No3         No4 
           count    9.000000    9.000000    9.000000    9.000000 
           mean    - 0.150212    0.701033    0.289193   - 0.387788 
           std      0.988306    0.457685    0.579920    0.877532 
           min     - 1.749765    0.055676   - 0.458027   - 1.443217 
           25 %     - 0.583595    0.342680   - 0.251879   - 1.070043 
           50 %     - 0.326238    0.816454    0.222400   - 0.455947 
           75 %      0.184519    0.937082    0.731000   - 0.104411 
           max      1.618982    1.541605    1.153036    1.361556 
 
 
 Provides meta information regarding the data, columns and the index. 
 
 Provides helpful summary statistics per column (for numerical data). 
 

 In addition, you can easily get the column-wise or row-wise sums, means, and cumulative sums as follows: 

 In   [ 42 ] :   df . sum ( )    
 Out [ 42 ] :   No1     - 1.351906 
           No2      6.309298 
           No3      2.602739 
           No4     - 3.490089 
           dtype :   float64 
 
 In   [ 43 ] :   df . mean ( )    
 Out [ 43 ] :   No1     - 0.150212 
           No2      0.701033 
           No3      0.289193 
           No4     - 0.387788 
           dtype :   float64 
 
 In   [ 44 ] :   df . mean ( axis = 0 )    
 Out [ 44 ] :   No1     - 0.150212 
           No2      0.701033 
           No3      0.289193 
           No4     - 0.387788 
           dtype :   float64 
 
 In   [ 45 ] :   df . mean ( axis = 1 )    
 Out [ 45 ] :   2019 - 01 - 31     - 0.126621 
           2019 - 02 - 28      0.161669 
           2019 - 03 - 31      0.010661 
           2019 - 04 - 30      0.200390 
           2019 - 05 - 31     - 0.264500 
           2019 - 06 - 30      0.516568 
           2019 - 07 - 31      0.803539 
           2019 - 08 - 31     - 0.372845 
           2019 - 09 - 30      0.088650 
           Freq :   M ,   dtype :   float64 
 
 In   [ 46 ] :   df . cumsum ( )    
 Out [ 46 ] :                    No1         No2         No3         No4 
           2019 - 01 - 31   - 1.749765    0.342680    1.153036   - 0.252436 
           2019 - 02 - 28   - 0.768445    0.856899    1.374215   - 1.322479 
           2019 - 03 - 31   - 0.957941    1.111901    0.916188   - 0.887316 
           2019 - 04 - 30   - 1.541536    1.928748    1.588909   - 0.991727 
           2019 - 05 - 31   - 2.072816    2.958480    1.150774   - 2.110045 
           2019 - 06 - 30   - 0.453834    4.500086    0.898895   - 2.952481 
           2019 - 07 - 31   - 0.269316    5.437168    1.629895   - 1.590925 
           2019 - 08 - 31   - 0.595554    5.492844    1.852294   - 3.034142 
           2019 - 09 - 30   - 1.351906    6.309298    2.602739   - 3.490089 
 
 
 Column-wise sum. 
 
 Column-wise mean. 
 
 Row-wise mean. 
 
 Column-wise cumulative sum (starting at first index position). 
 

 DataFrame  objects also understand  NumPy  universal functions as expected: 

 In   [ 47 ] :   np . mean ( df )    
 Out [ 47 ] :   No1     - 0.150212 
           No2      0.701033 
           No3      0.289193 
           No4     - 0.387788 
           dtype :   float64 
 
 In   [ 48 ] :   np . log ( df )    
 
           / Users / yves / miniconda3 / envs / base / lib / python3 . 6 / site - packages / ipykernel_launcher . py : 1 :   RuntimeWarning :   invalid   value   encountered   in   log 
             """ Entry point for launching an IPython kernel. 
 
 
 Out[48]:                  No1       No2       No3       No4 
          2019-01-31       NaN -1.070957  0.142398       NaN 
          2019-02-28 -0.018856 -0.665106 -1.508780       NaN 
          2019-03-31       NaN -1.366486       NaN -0.832033 
          2019-04-30       NaN -0.202303 -0.396425       NaN 
          2019-05-31       NaN  0.029299       NaN       NaN 
          2019-06-30  0.481797  0.432824       NaN       NaN 
          2019-07-31 -1.690005 -0.064984 -0.313341  0.308628 
          2019-08-31       NaN -2.888206 -1.503279       NaN 
          2019-09-30       NaN -0.202785 -0.287089       NaN 
 
 In [49]: np.sqrt(abs(df))   
 Out[49]:                  No1       No2       No3       No4 
          2019-01-31  1.322787  0.585389  1.073795  0.502430 
          2019-02-28  0.990616  0.717091  0.470297  1.034429 
          2019-03-31  0.435311  0.504977  0.676777  0.659669 
          2019-04-30  0.763934  0.903796  0.820196  0.323127 
          2019-05-31  0.728890  1.014757  0.661918  1.057506 
          2019-06-30  1.272392  1.241614  0.501876  0.917843 
          2019-07-31  0.429556  0.968030  0.854986  1.166857 
          2019-08-31  0.571173  0.235958  0.471593  1.201340 
          2019-09-30  0.869685  0.903578  0.866282  0.675238 
 
 In [50]: np.sqrt(abs(df)).sum()   
 Out[50]: No1    7.384345 
          No2    7.075190 
          No3    6.397719 
          No4    7.538440 
          dtype: float64 
 
 In [51]: 100 * df + 100   
 Out[51]:                    No1         No2         No3         No4 
          2019-01-31  -74.976547  134.268040  215.303580   74.756396 
          2019-02-28  198.132079  151.421884  122.117967   -7.004333 
          2019-03-31   81.050417  125.500144   54.197301  143.516349 
          2019-04-30   41.640495  181.684707  167.272081   89.558886 
          2019-05-31   46.871962  202.973269   56.186438  -11.831825 
          2019-06-30  261.898166  254.160517   74.812086   15.756426 
          2019-07-31  118.451869  193.708220  173.100034  236.155613 
          2019-08-31   67.376194  105.567601  122.239961  -44.321700 
          2019-09-30   24.364769  181.645401  175.044476   54.405307 
 
 
 Column-wise mean. 
 
 Element-wise natural logarithm; a warning is raised but the calculations runs through, resulting in multiple  NaN  values. 
 
 Element-wise square root for the absolute values … 
 
 … and the column-wise mean values for the results. 
 
 A linear transform of the numerical data. 
 
 NumPy Universal Functions 
 In general, you can apply  NumPy  universal functions to  pandas   DataFrame  objects whenever they could be applied to an  ndarray  object containing the same type of data. 
 

 pandas  is quite error tolerant, in the sense that it captures errors and just puts a  NaN  value where the respective mathematical operation fails. Not only this, but as briefly shown before, you can also work with such incomplete data sets as if they were complete in a number of cases. This comes in handy, since reality is characterized by incomplete data sets more often than one wishes for. 
 













 
 Basic Visualization 

 Plotting of data is only one line of code away in general, once the data is stored in a  DataFrame  object (cf.  Figure 5-1 ): 

 In   [ 52 ] :   from   pylab   import   plt ,   mpl    
           plt . style . use ( ' seaborn ' )    
           mpl . rcParams [ ' font.family ' ]   =   ' serif '    
           % matplotlib   inline 
 
 In   [ 53 ] :   df . cumsum ( ) . plot ( lw = 2.0 ,   figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch05/pd_plot_01.png') 
 
 
 Customizing the plotting style. 
 
 Plotting the cumulative sums of the four columns as line plot. 
 

 
 
 Figure 5-1.  Line plot of a DataFrame object 
 

 Basically,  pandas  provides a wrapper around  matplotplib  (cf.  Chapter 7 ), specifically designed for  DataFrame  objects.  Table 5-4  lists the parameters that the  plot  method takes. 
 
 Table 5-4.  Parameters of plot method 
 
 
 Parameter 
 Format 
 Description 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 Label/position, default  None 
 Only used when column values are x-ticks 
 
 
 y 
 Label/position, default  None 
 Only used when column values are y-ticks 
 
 
 subplots 
 Boolean, default  False 
 Plot columns in subplots 
 
 
 sharex 
 Boolean, default  True 
 Sharing of the x-axis 
 
 
 sharey 
 Boolean, default  False 
 Sharing of the y-axis 
 
 
 use_index 
 Boolean, default  True 
 Use of  DataFrame.index  as x-ticks 
 
 
 stacked 
 Boolean, default  False 
 Stack (only for bar plots) 
 
 
 sort_columns 
 Boolean, default  False 
 Sort columns alphabetically before plotting 
 
 
 title 
 String, default  None 
 Title for the plot 
 
 
 grid 
 Boolean, default  False 
 Horizontal and vertical grid lines 
 
 
 legend 
 Boolean, default  True 
 Legend of labels 
 
 
 ax 
 matplotlib  axis object 
 matplotlib  axis object to use for plotting 
 
 
 style 
 String or list/dictionary 
 line plotting style (for each column) 
 
 
 kind 
 " line “/” bar “/” barh “/” kde “/” density " 
 type of plot 
 
 
 logx 
 Boolean, default  False 
 Logarithmic scaling of x-axis 
 
 
 logy 
 Boolean, default  False 
 Logarithmic scaling of y-axis 
 
 
 xticks 
 Sequence, default  Index 
 x-ticks for the plot 
 
 
 yticks 
 Sequence, default  Values 
 y-ticks for the plot 
 
 
 xlim 
 2-tuple, list 
 Boundaries for x-axis 
 
 
 ylim 
 2-tuple, list 
 Boundaries for y-axis 
 
 
 rot 
 Integer, default  None 
 Rotation of x-ticks 
 
 
 secondary_y 
 Boolean/sequence, default  False 
 Secondary y-axis 
 
 
 mark_right 
 Boolean, default  True 
 Automatic labeling of secondary axis 
 
 
 colormap 
 String/colormap object, default  None 
 Colormap to use for plotting 
 
 
 kwds 
 Keywords 
 Options to pass to  matplotlib 
 
 
 

 As another example consider a bar plot of the same data (see  Figure 5-1 ). 

 In   [ 54 ] :   df . plot ( kind = ' bar ' ,   figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch05/pd_plot_02.png') 
 
 
 Uses the  kind  parameter to change the plot type. 
 

 
 
 Figure 5-2.  Bar plot of a DataFrame object 
 
 













 
 Series Class 

 So far, we have worked mainly with the  pandas   DataFrame  class. The  Series  class is another important class that comes with  pandas . It is characterized by the fact that it has only a single column of data. In that sense, it is a specialization of the  DataFrame  class that shares many but not all characteristics and capabilities. Regularly, a  Series  object is obtained when a single column is selected from the multi-column  DataFrame  object: 

 In   [ 55 ]:   type ( df ) 
 Out [ 55 ]:   pandas . core . frame . DataFrame 

 In   [ 56 ]:   s   =   df [ 'No1' ] 

 In   [ 57 ]:   s 
 Out [ 57 ]:   2019 - 01 - 31     - 1.749765 
          2019 - 02 - 28      0.981321 
          2019 - 03 - 31     - 0.189496 
          2019 - 04 - 30     - 0.583595 
          2019 - 05 - 31     - 0.531280 
          2019 - 06 - 30      1.618982 
          2019 - 07 - 31      0.184519 
          2019 - 08 - 31     - 0.326238 
          2019 - 09 - 30     - 0.756352 
          Freq :   M ,   Name :   No1 ,   dtype :   float64 

 In   [ 58 ]:   type ( s ) 
 Out [ 58 ]:   pandas . core . series . Series 

 The main  DataFrame  methods are available for  Series  objects as well. For illustration, consider the  mean()  and  plot()  methods (see  Figure 5-3 ): 

 In   [ 59 ]:   s . mean () 
 Out [ 59 ]:   - 0.15021177307319458 

 In   [ 60 ]:   s . plot ( lw = 2.0 ,   figsize = ( 10 ,   6 )); 
          # plt.savefig('../../images/ch05/pd_plot_03.png') 

 
 
 Figure 5-3.  Line plot of a Series object 
 
 













 
 GroupBy Operations 

 pandas  has powerful and flexible grouping capabilities. They work similarly to grouping in  SQL  as well as pivot tables in Microsoft  Excel . To have something to group by, we add a column indicating the quarter the respective data of the index belongs to: 

 In   [ 61 ]:   df [ 'Quarter' ]   =   [ 'Q1' ,   'Q1' ,   'Q1' ,   'Q2' ,   'Q2' , 
                           'Q2' ,   'Q3' ,   'Q3' ,   'Q3' ] 
          df 
 Out [ 61 ]:                    No1         No2         No3         No4   Quarter 
          2019 - 01 - 31   - 1.749765    0.342680    1.153036   - 0.252436        Q1 
          2019 - 02 - 28    0.981321    0.514219    0.221180   - 1.070043        Q1 
          2019 - 03 - 31   - 0.189496    0.255001   - 0.458027    0.435163        Q1 
          2019 - 04 - 30   - 0.583595    0.816847    0.672721   - 0.104411        Q2 
          2019 - 05 - 31   - 0.531280    1.029733   - 0.438136   - 1.118318        Q2 
          2019 - 06 - 30    1.618982    1.541605   - 0.251879   - 0.842436        Q2 
          2019 - 07 - 31    0.184519    0.937082    0.731000    1.361556        Q3 
          2019 - 08 - 31   - 0.326238    0.055676    0.222400   - 1.443217        Q3 
          2019 - 09 - 30   - 0.756352    0.816454    0.750445   - 0.455947        Q3 

 Now, we can group by the  Quarter  column and can output statistics for the single groups: 

 In   [ 62 ] :   groups   =   df . groupby ( ' Quarter ' )    
 
 In   [ 63 ] :   groups . size ( )    
 Out [ 63 ] :   Quarter 
           Q1      3 
           Q2      3 
           Q3      3 
           dtype :   int64 
 
 In   [ 64 ] :   groups . mean ( )    
 Out [ 64 ] :                 No1         No2         No3         No4 
           Quarter 
           Q1        - 0.319314    0.370634    0.305396   - 0.295772 
           Q2         0.168035    1.129395   - 0.005765   - 0.688388 
           Q3        - 0.299357    0.603071    0.567948   - 0.179203 
 
 In   [ 65 ] :   groups . max ( )    
 Out [ 65 ] :                 No1         No2         No3         No4 
           Quarter 
           Q1         0.981321    0.514219    1.153036    0.435163 
           Q2         1.618982    1.541605    0.672721   - 0.104411 
           Q3         0.184519    0.937082    0.750445    1.361556 
 
 In   [ 66 ] :   groups . aggregate ( [ min ,   max ] ) . round ( 2 )    
 Out [ 66 ] :             No1           No2           No3           No4 
                     min     max     min     max     min     max     min     max 
           Quarter 
           Q1        - 1.75    0.98    0.26    0.51   - 0.46    1.15   - 1.07    0.44 
           Q2        - 0.58    1.62    0.82    1.54   - 0.44    0.67   - 1.12   - 0.10 
           Q3        - 0.76    0.18    0.06    0.94    0.22    0.75   - 1.44    1.36 
 
 
 Groups according to the  Quarter  column. 
 
 Gives the number of rows in the group. 
 
 Gives the mean per column. 
 
 Gives the maximum value per column. 
 
 Gives both the minimum and maximum values per column. 
 

 Grouping can also be done with multiple columns. To this end, another column, indicating whether the month of the index date is odd or even, is introduced: 

 In   [ 67 ]:   df [ 'Odd_Even' ]   =   [ 'Odd' ,   'Even' ,   'Odd' ,   'Even' ,   'Odd' ,   'Even' , 
                            'Odd' ,   'Even' ,   'Odd' ] 

 In   [ 68 ]:   groups   =   df . groupby ([ 'Quarter' ,   'Odd_Even' ]) 

 In   [ 69 ]:   groups . size () 
 Out [ 69 ]:   Quarter    Odd_Even 
          Q1         Even          1 
                   Odd           2 
          Q2         Even          2 
                   Odd           1 
          Q3         Even          1 
                   Odd           2 
          dtype :   int64 

 In   [ 70 ]:   groups [[ 'No1' ,   'No4' ]] . aggregate ([ sum ,   np . mean ]) 
 Out [ 70 ]:                          No1                   No4 
                                 sum        mean         sum        mean 
          Quarter   Odd_Even 
          Q1        Even        0.981321    0.981321   - 1.070043   - 1.070043 
                  Odd        - 1.939261   - 0.969631    0.182727    0.091364 
          Q2        Even        1.035387    0.517693   - 0.946847   - 0.473423 
                  Odd        - 0.531280   - 0.531280   - 1.118318   - 1.118318 
          Q3        Even       - 0.326238   - 0.326238   - 1.443217   - 1.443217 
                  Odd        - 0.571834   - 0.285917    0.905609    0.452805 

 This concludes the introduction into  pandas  and the use of  DataFrame  objects. Subsequent sections apply this tool set to real-world financial data. 
 













 
 Complex Selection 

 Often, data selection is accomplished by formulation conditions on column values, and potentially combining multiple such conditions logically. Consider the following data set. 

 In   [ 71 ] :   data   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( 10 ,   2 ) )    
 
 In   [ 72 ] :   df   =   pd . DataFrame ( data ,   columns = [ ' x ' ,   ' y ' ] )    
 
 In   [ 73 ] :   df . info ( )    
 
           < class   ' pandas . core . frame . DataFrame ' > 
           RangeIndex :   10   entries ,   0   to   9 
           Data   columns   ( total   2   columns ) : 
           x      10   non - null   float64 
           y      10   non - null   float64 
           dtypes :   float64 ( 2 ) 
           memory   usage :   240.0   bytes 
 
 
 In   [ 74 ] :   df . head ( )    
 Out [ 74 ] :             x           y 
           0    1.189622   - 1.690617 
           1   - 1.356399   - 1.232435 
           2   - 0.544439   - 0.668172 
           3    0.007315   - 0.612939 
           4    1.299748   - 1.733096 
 
 In   [ 75 ] :   df . tail ( )    
 Out [ 75 ] :             x           y 
           5   - 0.983310    0.357508 
           6   - 1.613579    1.470714 
           7   - 1.188018   - 0.549746 
           8   - 0.940046   - 0.827932 
           9    0.108863    0.507810 
 
 
 ndarray  object with standard normally distributed random numbers. 
 
 DataFrame  object with the same random numbers. 
 
 The first five rows via the  head()  method. 
 
 The final five rows via the  tail()  method. 
 

 The following code illustrates the application of Python’s comparison operators and logical operators on values in the two columns. 

 In   [ 76 ] :   df [ ' x ' ]   >   0.5    
 Out [ 76 ] :   0       True 
           1      False 
           2      False 
           3      False 
           4       True 
           5      False 
           6      False 
           7      False 
           8      False 
           9      False 
           Name :   x ,   dtype :   bool 
 
 In   [ 77 ] :   ( df [ ' x ' ]   >   0 )   &   ( df [ ' y ' ]   <   0 )    
 Out [ 77 ] :   0       True 
           1      False 
           2      False 
           3       True 
           4       True 
           5      False 
           6      False 
           7      False 
           8      False 
           9      False 
           dtype :   bool 
 
 In   [ 78 ] :   ( df [ ' x ' ]   >   0 )   |   ( df [ ' y ' ]   <   0 )    
 Out [ 78 ] :   0       True 
           1       True 
           2       True 
           3       True 
           4       True 
           5      False 
           6      False 
           7       True 
           8       True 
           9       True 
           dtype :   bool 
 
 
 Check whether value in column  x  is greater than 0.5. 
 
 Check whether value in column  x  is positive  and  value in column  y  is negative. 
 
 Check whether value in column  x  is positive  or  value in column  y  is negative. 
 

 Using the resulting Boolean  Series  objects, complex data (row) selection is straightforward. 

 In   [ 79 ] :   df [ df [ ' x ' ]   >   0 ]    
 Out [ 79 ] :             x           y 
           0    1.189622   - 1.690617 
           3    0.007315   - 0.612939 
           4    1.299748   - 1.733096 
           9    0.108863    0.507810 
 
 In   [ 80 ] :   df [ ( df [ ' x ' ]   >   0 )   &   ( df [ ' y ' ]   <   0 ) ]    
 Out [ 80 ] :             x           y 
           0    1.189622   - 1.690617 
           3    0.007315   - 0.612939 
           4    1.299748   - 1.733096 
 
 In   [ 81 ] :   df [ ( df . x   >   0 )   |   ( df . y   <   0 ) ]    
 Out [ 81 ] :             x           y 
           0    1.189622   - 1.690617 
           1   - 1.356399   - 1.232435 
           2   - 0.544439   - 0.668172 
           3    0.007315   - 0.612939 
           4    1.299748   - 1.733096 
           7   - 1.188018   - 0.549746 
           8   - 0.940046   - 0.827932 
           9    0.108863    0.507810 
 
 
 All rows for which the value in column  x  is greater than 0.5. 
 
 All rows for which the value in column  x  is positive  and  the value in column  y  is negative. 
 
 All rows for which the value in column  x  is positive  or  the value in column  y  is negative (columns are accessed here via the respective attributes). 
 

 Comparison operators can also be applied to complete  DataFrame  objects at once. 

 In   [ 82 ] :   df   >   0    
 Out [ 82 ] :          x        y 
           0     True    False 
           1    False    False 
           2    False    False 
           3     True    False 
           4     True    False 
           5    False     True 
           6    False     True 
           7    False    False 
           8    False    False 
           9     True     True 
 
 In   [ 83 ] :   df [ df   >   0 ]    
 Out [ 83 ] :             x           y 
           0    1.189622         NaN 
           1         NaN         NaN 
           2         NaN         NaN 
           3    0.007315         NaN 
           4    1.299748         NaN 
           5         NaN    0.357508 
           6         NaN    1.470714 
           7         NaN         NaN 
           8         NaN         NaN 
           9    0.108863    0.507810 
 
 
 Which values in the  DataFrame  object are positive? 
 
 Select all such values and put a  NaN  in all other places. 
 
 













 
 Concatenation, Joining and Merging 

 This section walks through different approaches to combine two simple data sets in the form of  DataFrame  objects. The two simple data sets are: 

 In   [ 84 ]:   df1   =   pd . DataFrame ([ '100' ,   '200' ,   '300' ,   '400' ], 
                              index = [ 'a' ,   'b' ,   'c' ,   'd' ], 
                              columns = [ 'A' ,]) 

 In   [ 85 ]:   df1 
 Out [ 85 ]:        A 
          a    100 
          b    200 
          c    300 
          d    400 

 In   [ 86 ]:   df2   =   pd . DataFrame ([ '200' ,   '150' ,   '50' ], 
                              index = [ 'f' ,   'b' ,   'd' ], 
                              columns = [ 'B' ,]) 

 In   [ 87 ]:   df2 
 Out [ 87 ]:        B 
          f    200 
          b    150 
          d     50 








 
 Concatenation 

 Concatenation or appending basically mean that rows are added from one  DataFrame  objects to another one. This can be accomplished via the  append()  method or via the  pd.concat()  function. A major question is how the index values are handled. 

 In   [ 88 ] :   df1 . append ( df2 )    
 Out [ 88 ] :        A      B 
           a    100    NaN 
           b    200    NaN 
           c    300    NaN 
           d    400    NaN 
           f    NaN    200 
           b    NaN    150 
           d    NaN     50 
 
 In   [ 89 ] :   df1 . append ( df2 ,   ignore_index = True )    
 Out [ 89 ] :        A      B 
           0    100    NaN 
           1    200    NaN 
           2    300    NaN 
           3    400    NaN 
           4    NaN    200 
           5    NaN    150 
           6    NaN     50 
 
 In   [ 90 ] :   pd . concat ( ( df1 ,   df2 ) )    
 Out [ 90 ] :        A      B 
           a    100    NaN 
           b    200    NaN 
           c    300    NaN 
           d    400    NaN 
           f    NaN    200 
           b    NaN    150 
           d    NaN     50 
 
 In   [ 91 ] :   pd . concat ( ( df1 ,   df2 ) ,   ignore_index = True )    
 Out [ 91 ] :        A      B 
           0    100    NaN 
           1    200    NaN 
           2    300    NaN 
           3    400    NaN 
           4    NaN    200 
           5    NaN    150 
           6    NaN     50 
 
 
 Appends data from  df2  as new rows to  df1 . 
 
 Does the same but ignores the indices. 
 
 Has the same effect as the first and … 
 
 second append operation, respectively. 
 
 













 
 Joining 

 When joining the two data sets, the sequence of the  DataFrame  objects also matters but in a different way. Only the index values from the first  DataFrame  object are used. This default behavior is called a  left join . 

 In   [ 92 ] :   df1 . join ( df2 )    
 Out [ 92 ] :        A      B 
           a    100    NaN 
           b    200    150 
           c    300    NaN 
           d    400     50 
 
 In   [ 93 ] :   df2 . join ( df1 )    
 Out [ 93 ] :        B      A 
           f    200    NaN 
           b    150    200 
           d     50    400 
 
 
 Index values of  df1  relevant. 
 
 Index values of  df2  relevant. 
 

 There is a total of four different join methods available, each leading to a different behavior with regard to how index values and the corresponding data rows are handled. 

 In   [ 94 ] :   df1 . join ( df2 ,   how = ' left ' )    
 Out [ 94 ] :        A      B 
           a    100    NaN 
           b    200    150 
           c    300    NaN 
           d    400     50 
 
 In   [ 95 ] :   df1 . join ( df2 ,   how = ' right ' )    
 Out [ 95 ] :        A      B 
           f    NaN    200 
           b    200    150 
           d    400     50 
 
 In   [ 96 ] :   df1 . join ( df2 ,   how = ' inner ' )    
 Out [ 96 ] :        A      B 
           b    200    150 
           d    400     50 
 
 In   [ 97 ] :   df1 . join ( df2 ,   how = ' outer ' )    
 Out [ 97 ] :        A      B 
           a    100    NaN 
           b    200    150 
           c    300    NaN 
           d    400     50 
           f    NaN    200 
 
 
 Left join is the default operation. 
 
 Right join is the same as reversing the sequence of the  DataFrame  objects. 
 
 Inner join only preserves those index values found in both indices. 
 
 Outer join preserves all index values from both indices. 
 

 A join can also happen based on an empty  DataFrame  object. In this case, the columns are created  sequentially  leading to a behavior similar to a left join. 

 In   [ 98 ] :   df   =   pd . DataFrame ( ) 
 
 In   [ 99 ] :   df [ ' A ' ]   =   df1    
 
 In   [ 100 ] :   df 
 Out [ 100 ] :        A 
            0    NaN 
            1    NaN 
            2    NaN 
            3    NaN 
 
 In   [ 101 ] :   df [ ' B ' ]   =   df2    
 
 In   [ 102 ] :   df 
 Out [ 102 ] :        A      B 
            0    NaN    NaN 
            1    NaN    NaN 
            2    NaN    NaN 
            3    NaN    NaN 
 
 
 df1  as first column  A . 
 
 df2  as second column  B . 
 

 Making use of a dictionary to combine the data sets yields a result similar to an outer join since the columns are created  simultaneously . 

 In   [ 103 ] :   df   =   pd . DataFrame ( { ' A ' :   df1 [ ' A ' ] ,   ' B ' :   df2 [ ' B ' ] } )    
 
 In   [ 104 ] :   df 
 Out [ 104 ] :        A      B 
            a    100    NaN 
            b    200    150 
            c    300    NaN 
            d    400     50 
            f    NaN    200 
 
 
 The columns of the  DataFrame  objects are used as values in the  dict  object. 
 
 













 
 Merging 

 While a join operation takes place based on the indices of the  DataFrame  objects to be joined, a merge operation typically takes place on a column shared between the two data sets. To this end, a new column  C  is added to both original  DataFrame  objects: 

 In   [ 105 ]:   c   =   pd . Series ([ 250 ,   150 ,   50 ],   index = [ 'b' ,   'd' ,   'c' ]) 
           df1 [ 'C' ]   =   c 
           df2 [ 'C' ]   =   c 

 In   [ 106 ]:   df1 
 Out [ 106 ]:        A        C 
           a    100      NaN 
           b    200    250.0 
           c    300     50.0 
           d    400    150.0 

 In   [ 107 ]:   df2 
 Out [ 107 ]:        B        C 
           f    200      NaN 
           b    150    250.0 
           d     50    150.0 

 By default, the merge operation in this case takes place based on the single shared column  C . Other options are available, however. 

 In   [ 108 ] :   pd . merge ( df1 ,   df2 )    
 Out [ 108 ] :        A        C      B 
            0    100      NaN    200 
            1    200    250.0    150 
            2    400    150.0     50 
 
 In   [ 109 ] :   pd . merge ( df1 ,   df2 ,   on = ' C ' )    
 Out [ 109 ] :        A        C      B 
            0    100      NaN    200 
            1    200    250.0    150 
            2    400    150.0     50 
 
 In   [ 110 ] :   pd . merge ( df1 ,   df2 ,   how = ' outer ' )    
 Out [ 110 ] :        A        C      B 
            0    100      NaN    200 
            1    200    250.0    150 
            2    300     50.0    NaN 
            3    400    150.0     50 
 
 
 The default merge on column  C . 
 
 An outer merge is also possible, preserving all data rows. 
 

 Many more types of merge operations are available, a few of which are illustrated in the following code: 

 In   [ 111 ]:   pd . merge ( df1 ,   df2 ,   left_on = 'A' ,   right_on = 'B' ) 
 Out [ 111 ]:        A      C_x      B    C_y 
           0    200    250.0    200    NaN 

 In   [ 112 ]:   pd . merge ( df1 ,   df2 ,   left_on = 'A' ,   right_on = 'B' ,   how = 'outer' ) 
 Out [ 112 ]:        A      C_x      B      C_y 
           0    100      NaN    NaN      NaN 
           1    200    250.0    200      NaN 
           2    300     50.0    NaN      NaN 
           3    400    150.0    NaN      NaN 
           4    NaN      NaN    150    250.0 
           5    NaN      NaN     50    150.0 

 In   [ 113 ]:   pd . merge ( df1 ,   df2 ,   left_index = True ,   right_index = True ) 
 Out [ 113 ]:        A      C_x      B      C_y 
           b    200    250.0    150    250.0 
           d    400    150.0     50    150.0 

 In   [ 114 ]:   pd . merge ( df1 ,   df2 ,   on = 'C' ,   left_index = True ) 
 Out [ 114 ]:        A        C      B 
           f    100      NaN    200 
           b    200    250.0    150 
           d    400    150.0     50 

 In   [ 115 ]:   pd . merge ( df1 ,   df2 ,   on = 'C' ,   right_index = True ) 
 Out [ 115 ]:        A        C      B 
           a    100      NaN    200 
           b    200    250.0    150 
           d    400    150.0     50 

 In   [ 116 ]:   pd . merge ( df1 ,   df2 ,   on = 'C' ,   left_index = True ,   right_index = True ) 
 Out [ 116 ]:        A        C      B 
           b    200    250.0    150 
           d    400    150.0     50 
 





 













 
 Performance Aspects 

 Many examples in this chapter illustrate that there are often multiple options to achieve the same goal with  pandas . This section compares such options for adding up element-wise two columns. First, the data set, generated with  NumPy . 

 In   [ 117 ] :   data   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( 1000000 ,   2 ) )    
 
 In   [ 118 ] :   data . nbytes    
 Out [ 118 ] :   16000000 
 
 In   [ 119 ] :   df   =   pd . DataFrame ( data ,   columns = [ ' x ' ,   ' y ' ] )    
 
 In   [ 120 ] :   df . info ( )    
 
            < class   ' pandas . core . frame . DataFrame ' > 
            RangeIndex :   1000000   entries ,   0   to   999999 
            Data   columns   ( total   2   columns ) : 
            x      1000000   non - null   float64 
            y      1000000   non - null   float64 
            dtypes :   float64 ( 2 ) 
            memory   usage :   15.3   MB 
 
 
 The  ndarray  object with random numbers. 
 
 The  DataFrame  object with the random numbers. 
 

 Second, some options to accomplish the task at hand with performance values. 

 In   [ 121 ] :   % time   res   =   df [ ' x ' ]   +   df [ ' y ' ]    
 
            CPU   times :   user   5.68   ms ,   sys :   14.5   ms ,   total :   20.1   ms 
            Wall   time :   4.06   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 122 ] :   res [ : 3 ] 
 Out [ 122 ] :   0      0.387242 
            1     - 0.969343 
            2     - 0.863159 
            dtype :   float64 
 
 In   [ 123 ] :   % time   res   =   df . sum ( axis = 1 )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   44   ms ,   sys :   14.9   ms ,   total :   58.9   ms 
            Wall   time :   57.6   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 124 ] :   res [ : 3 ] 
 Out [ 124 ] :   0      0.387242 
            1     - 0.969343 
            2     - 0.863159 
            dtype :   float64 
 
 In   [ 125 ] :   % time   res   =   df . values . sum ( axis = 1 )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   16.1   ms ,   sys :   1.74   ms ,   total :   17.8   ms 
            Wall   time :   16.6   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 126 ] :   res [ : 3 ] 
 Out [ 126 ] :   array ( [   0.3872424   ,   - 0.96934273 ,   - 0.86315944 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 127 ] :   % time   res   =   np . sum ( df ,   axis = 1 )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   39.7   ms ,   sys :   8.91   ms ,   total :   48.7   ms 
            Wall   time :   47.7   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 128 ] :   res [ : 3 ] 
 Out [ 128 ] :   0      0.387242 
            1     - 0.969343 
            2     - 0.863159 
            dtype :   float64 
 
 In   [ 129 ] :   % time   res   =   np . sum ( df . values ,   axis = 1 )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   16.1   ms ,   sys :   1.78   ms ,   total :   17.9   ms 
            Wall   time :   16.6   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 130 ] :   res [ : 3 ] 
 Out [ 130 ] :   array ( [   0.3872424   ,   - 0.96934273 ,   - 0.86315944 ] ) 
 
 
 Working with the columns ( Series  objects) directly is the fastest approach. 
 
 This calculates the sums by calling the  sum()  method on the  DataFrame  object. 
 
 This calculates the sums by calling the  sum()  method on the  ndarray  object. 
 
 This calculates the sums by using the universal function  np.sum()  method on the  DataFrame  object. 
 
 This calculates the sums by using the universal function  np.sum()  method on the  ndarray  object. 
 

 Finally, to more options which are based on the methods  eval()  and  apply() , respectively. 

 In   [ 131 ] :   % time   res   =   df . eval ( ' x + y ' )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   13.3   ms ,   sys :   15.6   ms ,   total :   28.9   ms 
            Wall   time :   18.5   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 132 ] :   res [ : 3 ] 
 Out [ 132 ] :   0      0.387242 
            1     - 0.969343 
            2     - 0.863159 
            dtype :   float64 
 
 In   [ 133 ] :   % time   res   =   df . apply ( lambda   row :   row [ ' x ' ]   +   row [ ' y ' ] ,   axis = 1 )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   22   s ,   sys :   71   ms ,   total :   22.1   s 
            Wall   time :   22.1   s 
 
 
 In   [ 134 ] :   res [ : 3 ] 
 Out [ 134 ] :   0      0.387242 
            1     - 0.969343 
            2     - 0.863159 
            dtype :   float64 
 
 # tag::PD_34[] 
 
 
 eval()  is a method dedicated to evaluation (complex) numerical expressions; columns can be directly addressed. 
 
 The slowest option is to use the  apply()  method row-by-row; this is like looping on the Python level over all rows. 
 
 Caution 
 pandas  provides multiple options in general to accomplish the same goal. If unsure, one should compare some options to make sure that the best possible performance is achieved when time is critical. In the simple example, execution times differ by orders or magnitude. 
 
 













 
 Conclusions 

 pandas  is a powerful tool for data analysis and has become the central package in the so-called PyData stack. Its  DataFrame  class is particularly suited to work with tabular data of any kind. Most operations on such objects are vectorized, leading not only — as in the  NumPy  case — to concise code but also to a high performance in general. In addition,  pandas  also makes working with incomplete data sets convenient, something not that convenient with  NumPy , for instance.  pandas  and the  DataFrame  class will be central in many later chapters of the book where additional features will also be used and illustrated when necessary. 
 













 
 Further Reading 

 pandas  is a well documented open source project with both an online documentation as well as a PDF version available for download. 1 . The following page provides all resources: 

 
 
 http://pandas.pydata.org/ 
 
 

 As for  NumPy , recommended references for  pandas  in book form are: 

 
 
 McKinney, Wes (2017):  Python for Data Analysis . 2nd ed., O’Reilly, Beijing et al. 
 
 
 VanderPlas, Jake (2016):  Python Data Science Handbook . O’Reilly, Beijing et al. 
 
 
 







 1  At the time of this writing the PDF version has 2,207 pages (version 0.21.1). 
 
 



 
 
   
   
 Chapter 6.  Object Orientated Programming 

 
 The purpose of software engineering is to control complexity, not to create it. 
 Pamela Zave 
 






 
 Introduction 

 Object oriented programming (OOP) is one of the most popular programming paradigms today. Used in the right way, it provides a number of advantages compared to, for example, procedural programming. In many cases, OOP seems to be particularly suited for financial modeling and implementing financial algorithms. However, there are also many critics of OOP, voicing their skepticism targeted towards single aspects of OOP or even the paradigm as a whole. This chapter takes a neutral stance in that OOP is considered an important tool that might not be the best one for every single problem, but one that should be at the disposal of programmers and quants working in finance. 

 With OOP, some new language comes along. The most important terms for the purposes of this book and chapter are (more follow below): 
 
 Class 
 
 An abstract definition of a class of objects. For example, a human being. 
 
 Attribute 
 
 A feature of the class ( class attribute ) or of an instance of the class ( instance attribute ). For example, being a mammal or color of the eyes. 
 
 Method 
 
 An operation that can be implemented on the class. For example, walking. 
 
 Parameters 
 
 Input parameters taken by a method to influence its behavior. For example, three steps. 
 
 Object 
 
 An instance of a class. For example, Sandra with blue eyes. 
 
 Instantiation 
 
 The process of creating a specific object based on an abstract class. 
 
 

 Translated into Python code, a simple class implementing the example of a human being might look as follows. 

 In   [ 1 ] :   class   HumanBeing ( object ) :    
              def   __init__ ( self ,   first_name ,   eye_color ) :    
                  self . first_name   =   first_name    
                  self . eye_color   =   eye_color    
                  self . position   =   0    
              def   walk_steps ( self ,   steps ) :    
                  self . position   + =   steps    
 
 
 Class definition statement. 
 
 Special method called during instantiation. 
 
 First name attribute initialized with parameter value. 
 
 Eye color attribute initialized with parameter value. 
 
 Position attribute initialized with 0. 
 
 Method definition for walking with  steps  as parameter. 
 
 Code that changes the position given the  steps  value. 
 

 Based on the class definition, a new Python object can be instantiated and used. 

 In   [ 2 ] :   Sandra   =   HumanBeing ( ' Sandra ' ,   ' blue ' )    
 
 In   [ 3 ] :   Sandra . first_name    
 Out [ 3 ] :   ' Sandra ' 
 
 In   [ 4 ] :   Sandra . position    
 Out [ 4 ] :   0 
 
 In   [ 5 ] :   Sandra . walk_steps ( 5 )    
 
 In   [ 6 ] :   Sandra . position    
 Out [ 6 ] :   5 
 
 
 The instantiation. 
 
 Accessing attribute values. 
 
 Calling the method. 
 
 Accessing the updated  position  value. 
 

 There are several  human aspects  that might speak for the use of OOP: 
 
 Natural way of thinking 
 
 Human thinking typically evolves around real-world or abstract objects, like, for example, a car or a financial instrument. OOP is suited to model such objects with their characteristics. 
 
 Reducing complexity 
 
 Via different approaches, OOP helps reducing the complexity of a problem or algorithm and to model it feature-by-feature. 
 
 Nicer user interfaces 
 
 OOP allows in many cases for nicer user interfaces and more compact code. This becomes evident, for example, when looking at  NumPy ’s  ndarray  class or  pandas ’s  DataFrame  class. 
 
 Pythonic way of modeling 
 
 Independent of the pros and cons of OOP, it is simply the dominating paradigm in Python. This is where the saying “Everything is an object in Python.” comes from. OOP also allows the programmer o build custom classes whose instances behave like every other instance of a standard Python class. 
 
 

 There are also several  technical aspects  that might speak for OOP: 
 
 Abstraction 
 
 The use of attributes and methods allows building abstract, flexible models of objects — with a focus on what is relevant and neglecting what is not needed. In finance, this might mean to have a general class that models a financial instrument in abstract fashion. Instances of such a class would then be concrete financial products, engineered and offered by an investment bank, for example. 
 
 Modularity 
 
 OOP simplifies to break code down into multiple modules which are then linked to form the complete code basis. For example, modeling a European option on a stock could be achieved by a single class or by two classes, one for the underlying stock and one for the option itself. 
 
 Inheritance 
 
 Inheritance refers to the concept that one class can  inherit  attributes and methods from another class. In finance, starting with a general financial instrument, the next level could be a general derivative instrument, then a European option, then a European call option. Every class might inherit attributes and methods from classes on a higher level. 
 
 Aggregation 
 
 Aggregation refers to the case in which an object is at least partly made up of multiple other objects that might exist independently. A class modeling a European call option might have as attributes other objects for both the underlying stock and the relevant short rate for discounting. The objects representing the stock and the short rate can be used independently by other objects as well. 
 
 Composition 
 
 Composition is similar to aggregation, but here the single objects cannot exist independently of each other. Consider a custom-tailored interest rate swap with a fixed leg and a floating leg. The two legs do not exist independently of the swap itself. 
 
 Polymorphism 
 
 Polymorphism can take on multiple forms. Of particular importance in a Python context is what is called  duck typing . This refers to the fact that standard operations can be implemented on many different classes and their instances without knowing exactly what particular object one is dealing with. For a class of financial instruments this might mean that one can call a method  get_current_price()  independent of the specific type of the object (stock, option, swap). 
 
 Encapsulation 
 
 This concept refers to the approach of making data within a class only accessible via public methods. A class modeling a stock might have an attribute  current_stock_price . Encapsulation would then give access to the attribute value via a method  get_current_stock_price()  and would hide the data from the user (make it private). This approach might avoid unintended effects by simply working with and possibly changing attribute values. However, there are limits as to how data can be made private in a Python class. 
 
 

 On a somewhat higher level, many of these aspects can be summarized by  two generals goals  in software engineering: 
 
 Re-usability 
 
 Concepts like inheritance and polymorphism improve code re-usability and increase efficiency and productivity of the programmer. They also simplify code maintenance. 
 
 Non-redundancy 
 
 At the same time, these approaches allow to build a almost non-redundant code, avoiding double implementation effort, reducing debugging and testing effort as well as maintenance effort. It might also lead to a smaller overall code basis. 
 
 

 The chapter is organized as follows: 
 
 “A Look at Python Objects” 
 
 The subsequent section takes a look at some Python objects through the lens of OOP. 
 
 “Basics of Python Classes” 
 
 This section introduces central elements of OOP in Python and uses financial instruments and portfolio positions as major examples. 
 
 “Python Data Model” 
 
 This section discusses important elements of the Python data model and roles that certain special methods play. 
 
 
 













 
 A Look at Python Objects 

 This section takes a brief look at some standard object, already encountered in previous section through the eyes of an OOP programmer. 








 
 int 

 To start simple, consider an integer object. Even for such a simple Python object, the major OOP features are present. 

 In   [ 7 ] :   n   =   5    
 
 In   [ 8 ] :   type ( n )    
 Out [ 8 ] :   int 
 
 In   [ 9 ] :   n . numerator    
 Out [ 9 ] :   5 
 
 In   [ 10 ] :   n . bit_length ( )    
 Out [ 10 ] :   3 
 
 In   [ 11 ] :   n   +   n    
 Out [ 11 ] :   10 
 
 In   [ 12 ] :   2   *   n    
 Out [ 12 ] :   10 
 
 In   [ 13 ] :   n . __sizeof__ ( )    
 Out [ 13 ] :   28 
 
 
 New instance  n . 
 
 Type of the object. 
 
 An attribute. 
 
 A method. 
 
 Applying the + operator (addition). 
 
 Applying the * operator (multiplication). 
 
 Calling the special method  __sizeof__()  to get the memory usage in bytes. 1 
 
 













 
 list 

 list  objects have, for example, some more methods but basically behave the same way. 

 In   [ 14 ] :   l   =   [ 1 ,   2 ,   3 ,   4 ]    
 
 In   [ 15 ] :   type ( l )    
 Out [ 15 ] :   list 
 
 In   [ 16 ] :   l [ 0 ]    
 Out [ 16 ] :   1 
 
 In   [ 17 ] :   l . append ( 10 )    
 
 In   [ 18 ] :   l   +   l    
 Out [ 18 ] :   [ 1 ,   2 ,   3 ,   4 ,   10 ,   1 ,   2 ,   3 ,   4 ,   10 ] 
 
 In   [ 19 ] :   2   *   l    
 Out [ 19 ] :   [ 1 ,   2 ,   3 ,   4 ,   10 ,   1 ,   2 ,   3 ,   4 ,   10 ] 
 
 In   [ 20 ] :   sum ( l )    
 Out [ 20 ] :   20 
 
 In   [ 21 ] :   l . __sizeof__ ( )    
 Out [ 21 ] :   104 
 
 
 New instance  l . 
 
 Type of the object. 
 
 Selecting an element via indexing. 
 
 A method. 
 
 Applying the + operator (concatenation). 
 
 Applying the * operator (concatenation). 
 
 Applying the standard Python function  sum() . 
 
 Calling the special method  __sizeof__()  to get the memory usage in bytes. 
 
 













 
 ndarray 

 int  and  list  objects are standard Python objects. The  NumPy   ndarray  object is a “custom-made” object from an open source package. 

 In   [ 22 ] :   import   numpy   as   np    
 
 In   [ 23 ] :   a   =   np . arange ( 16 ) . reshape ( ( 4 ,   4 ) )    
 
 In   [ 24 ] :   a    
 Out [ 24 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ,    3 ] , 
                  [   4 ,    5 ,    6 ,    7 ] , 
                  [   8 ,    9 ,   10 ,   11 ] , 
                  [ 12 ,   13 ,   14 ,   15 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 25 ] :   type ( a )    
 Out [ 25 ] :   numpy . ndarray 
 
 
 Importing  numpy . 
 
 A new instance  a . 
 
 Type of the object. 
 

 Although the  ndarray  object is not a standard object, it behaves in many cases as if it would be one — thanks to the Python data model as explained further below. 

 In   [ 26 ] :   a . nbytes    
 Out [ 26 ] :   128 
 
 In   [ 27 ] :   a . sum ( )    
 Out [ 27 ] :   120 
 
 In   [ 28 ] :   a . cumsum ( axis = 0 )    
 Out [ 28 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    1 ,    2 ,    3 ] , 
                  [   4 ,    6 ,    8 ,   10 ] , 
                  [ 12 ,   15 ,   18 ,   21 ] , 
                  [ 24 ,   28 ,   32 ,   36 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 29 ] :   a   +   a    
 Out [ 29 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    2 ,    4 ,    6 ] , 
                  [   8 ,   10 ,   12 ,   14 ] , 
                  [ 16 ,   18 ,   20 ,   22 ] , 
                  [ 24 ,   26 ,   28 ,   30 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 30 ] :   2   *   a    
 Out [ 30 ] :   array ( [ [   0 ,    2 ,    4 ,    6 ] , 
                  [   8 ,   10 ,   12 ,   14 ] , 
                  [ 16 ,   18 ,   20 ,   22 ] , 
                  [ 24 ,   26 ,   28 ,   30 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 31 ] :   sum ( a )    
 Out [ 31 ] :   array ( [ 24 ,   28 ,   32 ,   36 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 32 ] :   np . sum ( a )    
 Out [ 32 ] :   120 
 
 In   [ 33 ] :   a . __sizeof__ ( )    
 Out [ 33 ] :   112 
 
 
 An attribute. 
 
 A method (aggregation). 
 
 A method (no aggregation). 
 
 Applying the + operator (addition). 
 
 Applying the * operator (multiplication). 
 
 Applying the standard Python function  sum() . 
 
 Applying the  NumPy  universal function  np.sum() . 
 
 Calling the special method  __sizeof__()  to get the memory usage in bytes. 
 
 













 
 DataFrame 

 Finally, a quick look at the  pandas   DataFrame  object for the behavior is mostly the same as for the  ndarray  object. First, the instantiation of the  DataFrame  object based on the  ndarray  object. 

 In   [ 34 ] :   import   pandas   as   pd    
 
 In   [ 35 ] :   df   =   pd . DataFrame ( a ,   columns = list ( ' abcd ' ) )    
 
 In   [ 36 ] :   type ( df )    
 Out [ 36 ] :   pandas . core . frame . DataFrame 
 
 
 Importing  pandas . 
 
 A new instance  df . 
 
 Type of the object. 
 

 Second, a look at attributes, methods and operations. 

 In   [ 37 ] :   df . columns    
 Out [ 37 ] :   Index ( [ ' a ' ,   ' b ' ,   ' c ' ,   ' d ' ] ,   dtype = ' object ' ) 
 
 In   [ 38 ] :   df . sum ( )    
 Out [ 38 ] :   a      24 
           b      28 
           c      32 
           d      36 
           dtype :   int64 
 
 In   [ 39 ] :   df . cumsum ( )    
 Out [ 39 ] :       a     b     c     d 
           0     0     1     2     3 
           1     4     6     8    10 
           2    12    15    18    21 
           3    24    28    32    36 
 
 In   [ 40 ] :   df   +   df    
 Out [ 40 ] :       a     b     c     d 
           0     0     2     4     6 
           1     8    10    12    14 
           2    16    18    20    22 
           3    24    26    28    30 
 
 In   [ 41 ] :   2   *   df    
 Out [ 41 ] :       a     b     c     d 
           0     0     2     4     6 
           1     8    10    12    14 
           2    16    18    20    22 
           3    24    26    28    30 
 
 In   [ 42 ] :   np . sum ( df )    
 Out [ 42 ] :   a      24 
           b      28 
           c      32 
           d      36 
           dtype :   int64 
 
 In   [ 43 ] :   df . __sizeof__ ( )    
 Out [ 43 ] :   208 
 
 
 An attribute. 
 
 A method (aggregation). 
 
 A method (no aggregation). 
 
 Applying the + operator (addition). 
 
 Applying the * operator (multiplication). 
 
 Applying the  NumPy  universal function  np.sum() . 
 
 Calling the special method  __sizeof__()  to get the memory usage in bytes. 
 
 





 













 
 Basics of Python Classes 

 This section is about major concepts and the concrete syntax to make use of OOP in Python. The context now is about building custom made classes to model types of objects that cannot easily, efficiently or properly modeled by existing Python object types. Throughout the example of a  financial instrument  is used. Two lines of code suffice to create a new Python class. 

 In   [ 44 ] :   class   FinancialInstrument ( object ) :    
               pass    
 
 In   [ 45 ] :   fi   =   FinancialInstrument ( )    
 
 In   [ 46 ] :   type ( fi )    
 Out [ 46 ] :   __main__ . FinancialInstrument 
 
 In   [ 47 ] :   fi    
 Out [ 47 ] :   < __main__ . FinancialInstrument   at   0x10a21c828 > 
 
 In   [ 48 ] :   fi . __str__ ( )    
 Out [ 48 ] :   ' <__main__.FinancialInstrument object at 0x10a21c828> ' 
 
 In   [ 49 ] :   fi . price   =   100    
 
 In   [ 50 ] :   fi . price    
 Out [ 50 ] :   100 
 
 
 Class definition statement. 2 
 
 Some code; here simply the  pass  keyword. 
 
 A new instance of the class named  fi . 
 
 Every Python object comes with certain, so-called special attributes and methods (from  object ); here the special method to retrieve the string representation is called. 
 
 So-called data attributes — in contrast to regular attributes — can be defined on the fly for every object. 
 
   
 

 An important special method is  __init__  which gets called during every instantiation of an object. It takes as parameters the object itself ( self  by convention) and potentially multiple others. In addition to instance attributes 

 In   [ 51 ] :   class   FinancialInstrument ( object ) : 
               author   =   ' Yves Hilpisch '    
               def   __init__ ( self ,   symbol ,   price ) :    
                   self . symbol   =   symbol    
                   self . price   =   price    
 
 In   [ 52 ] :   FinancialInstrument . author    
 Out [ 52 ] :   ' Yves Hilpisch ' 
 
 In   [ 53 ] :   aapl   =   FinancialInstrument ( ' AAPL ' ,   100 )    
 
 In   [ 54 ] :   aapl . symbol    
 Out [ 54 ] :   ' AAPL ' 
 
 In   [ 55 ] :   aapl . author    
 Out [ 55 ] :   ' Yves Hilpisch ' 
 
 In   [ 56 ] :   aapl . price   =   105    
 
 In   [ 57 ] :   aapl . price    
 Out [ 57 ] :   105 
 
 
 Definition of a class attribute (= inherited by every instance). 
 
 The special method  __init__  called during initialization. 
 
 Definition of the instance attributes (= individual to every instance). 
 
 A new instance of the class named  fi . 
 
 Accessing an instance attribute. 
 
 Accessing a class attribute. 
 
 Changing the value of an instance attribute. 
 

 Prices of financial instruments change regularly, the symbol of a financial instrument probably does not change. To introduce encapsulation to the class definition, two methods  get_price()   and  set_price()  might be defined. The code that follows additionally inherits from the previous class definition (and not from  object  anymore). 

 In   [ 58 ] :   class   FinancialInstrument ( FinancialInstrument ) :    
               def   get_price ( self ) :    
                   return   self . price    
               def   set_price ( self ,   price ) :    
                   self . price   =   price    
 
 In   [ 59 ] :   fi   =   FinancialInstrument ( ' AAPL ' ,   100 )    
 
 In   [ 60 ] :   fi . get_price ( )    
 Out [ 60 ] :   100 
 
 In   [ 61 ] :   fi . set_price ( 105 )    
 
 In   [ 62 ] :   fi . get_price ( )    
 Out [ 62 ] :   105 
 
 In   [ 63 ] :   fi . price    
 Out [ 63 ] :   105 
 
 
 Class definition via inheritance from previous version. 
 
 Defines the  get_price  method. 
 
 Defines the  set_price  method … 
 
 … and updates the instance attribute value given the parameter value. 
 
 A new instance based on the new class definition named  fi . 
 
 Calls the  get_price()  method to read the instance attribute value. 
 
 Updates the instance attribute value via  set_price() . 
 
 Direct access to the instance attribute. 
 

 Encapsulation generally has the goal of hiding data from the user working with a class. Adding respective methods, sometimes called  getter  and  setter  methods, is one part of achieving this goal. This does not prevent, however, that the user my still directly access and manipulate instance attributes. This is where  private  instance attributes come into play. They are defined by two leading underscores. 

 In   [ 64 ] :   class   FinancialInstrument ( object ) : 
               def   __init__ ( self ,   symbol ,   price ) : 
                   self . symbol   =   symbol 
                   self . __price   =   price    
               def   get_price ( self ) : 
                   return   self . __price 
               def   set_price ( self ,   price ) : 
                   self . __price   =   price 
 
 In   [ 65 ] :   fi   =   FinancialInstrument ( ' AAPL ' ,   100 ) 
 
 In   [ 66 ] :   fi . get_price ( )    
 Out [ 66 ] :   100 
 
 In   [ 67 ] :   fi . __price    
 
           - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
           AttributeErrorTraceback   ( most   recent   call   last ) 
           < ipython - input - 67 - 74 c0dc05c9ae >   in   < module > ( ) 
 - - - - >   1   fi . __price    
 
           AttributeError :   ' FinancialInstrument '   object   has   no   attribute   ' __price ' 
 
 
 In   [ 68 ] :   fi . _FinancialInstrument__price    
 Out [ 68 ] :   100 
 
 In   [ 69 ] :   fi . _FinancialInstrument__price   =   105    
 
 In   [ 70 ] :   fi . set_price ( 100 )    
 
 
 Price is defined as a private instance attribute. 
 
 The method  get_price()  returns its value. 
 
 Trying to access the attribute directly raises an error. 
 
 By prepending the class name with a single leading underscore, direct access and manipulation are still possible. 
 
 Sets the price back to its original value. 
 
 Caution 
 Although encapsulation can basically be implemented for Python classes via private instance attributes and respective methods dealing with them, the hiding of data from the user cannot be fully enforced. In that sense, it is rather an engineering principle in Python than a technical feature of Python classes. 
 

 Consider another class that models a portfolio position of a financial instrument. With the two classes  aggregation  as a concept is easily illustrated. An instance of the  PortfolioPosition  class takes an instance of the  FinancialInstrument  class as attribute value. Adding an instance attribute, such as  position_size , one can then calculate, for instance, the position value. 

 In   [ 71 ] :   class   PortfolioPosition ( object ) : 
               def   __init__ ( self ,   financial_instrument ,   position_size ) : 
                   self . position   =   financial_instrument    
                   self . __position_size   =   position_size    
               def   get_position_size ( self ) : 
                   return   self . __position_size 
               def   update_position_size ( self ,   position_size ) : 
                   self . __position_size   =   position_size 
               def   get_position_value ( self ) : 
                   return   self . __position_size   *   \
                          self . position . get_price ( )    
 
 In   [ 72 ] :   pp   =   PortfolioPosition ( fi ,   10 ) 
 
 In   [ 73 ] :   pp . get_position_size ( ) 
 Out [ 73 ] :   10 
 
 In   [ 74 ] :   pp . get_position_value ( )    
 Out [ 74 ] :   1000 
 
 In   [ 75 ] :   pp . position . get_price ( )    
 Out [ 75 ] :   100 
 
 In   [ 76 ] :   pp . position . set_price ( 105 )    
 
 In   [ 77 ] :   pp . get_position_value ( )    
 Out [ 77 ] :   1050 
 
 
 An instance attribute based on an instance of the  FinancialInstrument  class. 
 
 A private instance attribute of the  PortfolioPosition  class. 
 
 Calculates the position value based on the attributes. 
 
 Methods attached to the instance attribute object can be accessed directly (could be hidden as well). 
 
 Updates the price of the financial instrument. 
 
 Calculates the new position value based on the updated price. 
 
 













 
 Python Data Model 

 The examples of the previous section already highlight some aspects of the so-called Python data or object model (cf.  https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html ). The Python data model allows to design classes that consistently interact with basic language constructs of Python. Among others, it supports (see Ramalho (2015), p. 4) the following tasks and constructs: 

 
 
 iteration 
 
 
 collection handling 
 
 
 attribute access 
 
 
 operator overloading 
 
 
 function and method invocation 
 
 
 object creation and destruction 
 
 
 string representation (e.g. for printing) 
 
 
 managed contexts (i.e.  with  blocks) 
 
 

 Since the Python data model is so important, this section is dedicated to an example that explores several aspects of it. The example is found in the book Ramalho (2015) and is slightly adjusted. It implements a class for one-dimensional, three element vector (think of vectors in Euclidean space). First, the special method  __init__ : 

 In   [ 78 ] :   class   Vector ( object ) : 
               def   __init__ ( self ,   x = 0 ,   y = 0 ,   z = 0 ) :    
                   self . x   =   x    
                   self . y   =   y    
                   self . z   =   z    
 
 In   [ 79 ] :   v   =   Vector ( 1 ,   2 ,   3 )    
 
 In   [ 80 ] :   v    
 Out [ 80 ] :   < __main__ . Vector   at   0x10a245d68 > 
 
 
 Three pre-initialized instance attributes (think three-dimensional space). 
 
 A new instance of the class named  v . 
 
 The default string representation. 
 

 The special method  __str__  allows the definition of custom string representations. 

 In   [ 81 ] :   class   Vector ( Vector ) : 
               def   __repr__ ( self ) : 
                   return   ' Vector( %r ,  %r ,  %r ) '   %   ( self . x ,   self . y ,   self . z ) 
 
 In   [ 82 ] :   v   =   Vector ( 1 ,   2 ,   3 ) 
 
 In   [ 83 ] :   v    
 Out [ 83 ] :   Vector ( 1 ,   2 ,   3 ) 
 
 In   [ 84 ] :   print ( v )    
 
           Vector ( 1 ,   2 ,   3 ) 
 
 
 The new string representation. 
 

 abs()  and  bool()  are two standard Python functions whose behavior on the  Vector  class can be defined via the special methods  __abs__  and  __bool__ . 

 In   [ 85 ] :   class   Vector ( Vector ) : 
               def   __abs__ ( self ) : 
                   return   ( self . x   * *   2   +    self . y   * *   2   + 
                           self . z   * *   2 )   * *   0.5    
 
               def   __bool__ ( self ) : 
                   return   bool ( abs ( self ) ) 
 
 In   [ 86 ] :   v   =   Vector ( 1 ,   2 ,   - 1 )    
 
 In   [ 87 ] :   abs ( v ) 
 Out [ 87 ] :   2.449489742783178 
 
 In   [ 88 ] :   bool ( v ) 
 Out [ 88 ] :   True 
 
 In   [ 89 ] :   v   =   Vector ( )    
 
 In   [ 90 ] :   v    
 Out [ 90 ] :   Vector ( 0 ,   0 ,   0 ) 
 
 In   [ 91 ] :   abs ( v ) 
 Out [ 91 ] :   0.0 
 
 In   [ 92 ] :   bool ( v ) 
 Out [ 92 ] :   False 
 
 
 Returns the Euclidean norm given the three attribute values. 
 
 A new  Vector  object with non-zero attribute values. 
 
 A new  Vector  object with zero attribute values only. 
 

 As shown multiple times, the  +  and  *  operators can be applied to almost any Python object. The behavior is defined through the special methods methods  __add__  and  __mul__ . 

 In   [ 93 ] :   class   Vector ( Vector ) : 
               def   __add__ ( self ,   other ) : 
                   x   =   self . x   +   other . x 
                   y   =   self . y   +   other . y 
                   z   =   self . z   +   other . z 
                   return   Vector ( x ,   y ,   z )    
 
               def   __mul__ ( self ,   scalar ) : 
                   return   Vector ( self . x   *   scalar , 
                                 self . y   *   scalar , 
                                 self . z   *   scalar )    
 
 In   [ 94 ] :   v   =   Vector ( 1 ,   2 ,   3 ) 
 
 In   [ 95 ] :   v   +   Vector ( 2 ,   3 ,   4 ) 
 Out [ 95 ] :   Vector ( 3 ,   5 ,   7 ) 
 
 In   [ 96 ] :   v   *   2 
 Out [ 96 ] :   Vector ( 2 ,   4 ,   6 ) 
 
 
 In this case, both special methods return an object of its own kind. 
 

 Another standard Python functions is  len()  which gives the length of an object in number of elements. This function accesses the special method  __len__  when called on a object. On the other hand, the special method  __getitem__  makes indexing via the square bracket notation possible. 

 In   [ 97 ] :   class   Vector ( Vector ) : 
               def   __len__ ( self ) : 
                   return   3    
 
               def   __getitem__ ( self ,   i ) : 
                   if   i   in   [ 0 ,   - 3 ] :   return   self . x 
                   elif   i   in   [ 1 ,   - 2 ] :   return   self . y 
                   elif   i   in   [ 2 ,   - 1 ] :   return   self . z 
                   else :   raise   IndexError ( ' Index out of range. ' ) 
 
 In   [ 98 ] :   v   =   Vector ( 1 ,   2 ,   3 ) 
 
 In   [ 99 ] :   len ( v ) 
 Out [ 99 ] :   3 
 
 In   [ 100 ] :   v [ 0 ] 
 Out [ 100 ] :   1 
 
 In   [ 101 ] :   v [ - 2 ] 
 Out [ 101 ] :   2 
 
 In   [ 102 ] :   v [ 3 ] 
 
            - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
            IndexErrorTraceback   ( most   recent   call   last ) 
            < ipython - input - 102 - 0 f5531c4b93d >   in   < module > ( ) 
 - - - - >   1   v [ 3 ] 
 
            < ipython - input - 97 - eef2cdc22510 >   in   __getitem__ ( self ,   i ) 
        7           elif   i   in   [ 1 ,   - 2 ] :   return   self . y 
        8           elif   i   in   [ 2 ,   - 1 ] :   return   self . z 
 - - - - >   9           else :   raise   IndexError ( ' Index out of range. ' ) 
 
            IndexError :   Index   out   of   range . 
 
 
 All instances of the  Vector  class have a length of three. 
 

 Finally, the special method  __iter__  defines the behavior during iterations over elements of an object. An object, for which this operation is defined is called  iterable . For instance, all collections and containers are iterable. 

 In   [ 103 ] :   class   Vector ( Vector ) : 
                def   __iter__ ( self ) : 
                    for   i   in   range ( len ( self ) ) : 
                        yield   self [ i ] 
 
 In   [ 104 ] :   v   =   Vector ( 1 ,   2 ,   3 ) 
 
 In   [ 105 ] :   for   i   in   range ( 3 ) :    
                print ( v [ i ] )    
 
            1 
            2 
            3 
 
 
 In   [ 106 ] :   for   coordinate   in   v :    
                print ( coordinate )    
 
            1 
            2 
            3 
 
 
 Indirect iteration using index values (via  __getitem__ ). 
 
 Direct iteration over the class instance (using  __iter__ ). 
 
 Tip 
 The Python data model allows the definition of Python classes that interact with standard Python operators, functions, etc. seamlessly. This makes Python a rather flexible programming language that can easily be enhanced by new classes and types of objects. 
 

 As a summary, sub-section  “Vector Class”  provides the  Vector  class definition in a single code block. 
 













 
 Conclusions 

 This chapter introduces notions and approaches from  object oriented programming (OOP)  both theoretically as well as on the basis of Python examples. OOP is one of the main programming paradigms used in Python. It does not only allow for the modeling and implementation of rather complex applications. It also allows to create custom objects that behave like standard Python objects due to the flexible  Python data model . Although there are many critics arguing against OOP, it is safe to say that it provides the Python programmer and quant with powerful means and tools that are helpful when a certain degree of complexity is reached. The derivatives pricing package discussed and presented in [Link to Come] presents such a case where OOP seems the only sensible programming paradigm to deal with the inherent complexities and requirements for abstraction. 
 













 
 Further Resources 

 These are valuable online resources about OOP in general and Python programming and Python OOP in particular: 

 
 
 Lecture Notes on Object-Oriented Programming 
 
 
 Object-Oriented Programming in Python 
 
 

 An excellent resource in book form about Python OOP and the Python data model is: 

 
 
 Ramalho, Luciano (2016):  Fluent Python . O’Reilly, Beijing et al. 
 
 
 













 
 Python Codes 








 
 Vector Class 

 In   [ 107 ]:   class   Vector ( object ): 
               def   __init__ ( self ,   x = 0 ,   y = 0 ,   z = 0 ): 
                   self . x   =   x 
                   self . y   =   y 
                   self . z   =   z 

               def   __repr__ ( self ): 
                   return   'Vector( %r ,  %r ,  %r )'   %   ( self . x ,   self . y ,   self . z ) 

               def   __abs__ ( self ): 
                   return   ( self . x   **   2   +    self . y   **   2   +   self . z   **   2 )   **   0.5 

               def   __bool__ ( self ): 
                   return   bool ( abs ( self )) 

               def   __add__ ( self ,   other ): 
                   x   =   self . x   +   other . x 
                   y   =   self . y   +   other . y 
                   z   =   self . z   +   other . z 
                   return   Vector ( x ,   y ,   z ) 

               def   __mul__ ( self ,   scalar ): 
                   return   Vector ( self . x   *   scalar , 
                                 self . y   *   scalar , 
                                 self . z   *   scalar ) 

               def   __len__ ( self ): 
                   return   3 

               def   __getitem__ ( self ,   i ): 
                   if   i   in   [ 0 ,   - 3 ]:   return   self . x 
                   elif   i   in   [ 1 ,   - 2 ]:   return   self . y 
                   elif   i   in   [ 2 ,   - 1 ]:   return   self . z 
                   else :   raise   IndexError ( 'Index out of range.' ) 

               def   __iter__ ( self ): 
                   for   i   in   range ( len ( self )): 
                       yield   self [ i ] 
 





 







 1  Special attributes and methods in Python are characterized by double leading and trailing underscores, such as in  __XYZ__ . 2  Camel case naming for classes is the recommended way. However, if there is no ambiguity, lower case naming can also be applied such as in  financial_instrument . 
 
 



 
 
   
   
 Chapter 7.  Data Visualization 

 
 Use a picture. It’s worth a thousand words. 
 Arthur Brisbane (1911) 
 

 This chapter is about basic visualization capabilities of the  matplotlib  and  plotly  libraries. 

 Although there are many other visualization libraries available,  matplotlib  has established itself as the benchmark and, in many situations, a robust and reliable visualization tool. It is both easy to use for standard plots and flexible when it comes to more complex plots and customizations. In addition, it is tightly integrated with  NumPy  and  pandas  and the data structures they provide. 

 matplotlib  only allows for the generation of plots in the form of bitmaps (for example, in PNG or JPG format). On the other hand, modern web technologies allow — based, for example, on the  Data-Driven Documents (D3.js)  standard — allow for nice interactive and also embeddable plots. Interactive, for example, in that one can zoom in to inspect certain areas in greater detail. A library that makes it really convenient to create such D3.js plots with Python is  plotly . A small additional library, called  Cufflinks , tightly integrates  plotly  with  pandas   DataFrame  objects and allows for the creation of the most popular financial plots (such as candlestick bars) 

 This chapter mainly covers the following topics: 
 
 “Static 2D Plotting” 
 
 This section introduces to  matplotlib  and presents a selection of typical 2D plots, from the most simple to some more advanced ones with two scales or different subplots. 
 
 “Static 3D Plotting” 
 
 Based on  matplotlib , a selection of 3D plots useful for certain financial applications are presented. 
 
 “Interactive 2D Plotting” 
 
 This section introduces to  plotly  and  Cufflinks  to create interactive 2D plots. Making use of the  QuantFigure  feature of  Cufflinks , this section is also about typical financial plots, used, for example, in technical stock analysis. 
 
 

 This chapter cannot be comprehensive with regard to data visualization with  Python ,  matplotlib  or  plotly , but it provides a number of examples for the basic and important capabilities of these packages for finance. Other examples are also found in later chapters. For instance,  Chapter 8  shows more in-depth how to visualize financial time series data with the  pandas  library. 






 
 Static 2D Plotting 

 Before creating the sample data and starting to plot, some imports and customizations first: 

 In   [ 1 ] :   import   matplotlib   as   mpl    
 
 In   [ 2 ] :   mpl . __version__    
 Out [ 2 ] :   ' 2.0.2 ' 
 
 In   [ 3 ] :   import   matplotlib.pyplot   as   plt    
 
 In   [ 4 ] :   plt . style . use ( ' seaborn ' )    
 
 In   [ 5 ] :   mpl . rcParams [ ' font.family ' ]   =   ' serif '    
 
 In   [ 6 ] :   % matplotlib   inline 
 
 
 Imports  matplotlib  with the usual abbreviation  mpl . 
 
 The version of  matplotlib  used. 
 
 Sets the font to be  serif  in all plots. 
 
 Imports the main plotting (sub-)package with the usual abbreviation  plt . 
 
 Sets the plotting style to  seaborn  (see, for instance, this  overview ). 
 








 
 One-Dimensional Data Set 

 In all that follows, we will plot data stored in either  NumPy   ndarray  objects or  pandas   DataFrame  objects. However,  matplotlib  is of course able to plot data stored in different  Python  formats, like  list  objects, as well.  The most fundamental, but nevertheless quite powerful, plotting function is  plt.plot() . In principle, it needs two sets of numbers: 

 
 
 x  values : a list or an array containing the  x  coordinates (values of the abscissa) 
 
 
 y  values : a list or an array containing the  y  coordinates (values of the ordinate) 
 
 

 The number of  x  and  y  values provided must match, of course. Consider the following code, whose output is presented in  Figure 7-1 . 

 In   [ 7 ] :   import   numpy   as   np 
 
 In   [ 8 ] :   np . random . seed ( 1000 )    
 
 In   [ 9 ] :   y   =   np . random . standard_normal ( 20 )    
 
 In   [ 10 ] :   x   =   np . arange ( len ( y ) )    
           plt . plot ( x ,   y ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_01') 
 
 
 Fixes the seed for the random number generator for reproducibility. 
 
 Draws the random numbers (y values). 
 
 Fixes the integers (x values). 
 
 Calls the  plt.plot()  function with the  x  and  y  objects. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-1.  Plot given x and y values 
 

 plt.plot()  notices when you pass a  ndarray  object. In this case, there is no need to provide the “extra” information of the  x  values. If you only provide the  y  values,  plot  takes the index values as the respective  x  values. Therefore, the following single line of code generates exactly the same output (cf.  Figure 7-2 ): 

 In   [ 11 ]:   plt . plot ( y ); 
          # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_02') 

 
 
 Figure 7-2.  Plot given data as  ndarray  object 
 
 NumPy Arrays and matplotlib 
 You can simply pass  NumPy   ndarray  objects to  matplotlib  functions.  matplotlib  is able to interpret the data structure for simplified plotting. However, be careful to not pass a too large and/or complex array. 
 

 Since the majority of the  ndarray  methods return again a  ndarray  object, you can also pass your object with a method (or even multiple methods, in some cases) attached. By calling the  cumsum()  method on the  ndarray  object with the sample data, we get the cumulative sum of this data and, as to be expected, a different output (cf.  Figure 7-3 ): 

 In   [ 12 ]:   plt . plot ( y . cumsum ()); 
          # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_03') 

 
 
 Figure 7-3.  Plot given a  ndarray  object with method attached 
 

 In general, the default plotting style does not satisfy typical requirements for reports, publications, etc. For example, you might want to customize the font used (e.g., for compatibility with  LaTeX  fonts), to have labels at the axes, or to plot a grid for better readability. This is where plotting styles come in to play (see above). In addition,  matplotlib  offers a large number of functions to customize the plotting style. Some are easily accessible; for others one has to dig a bit deeper. Easily accessible, for example, are those functions that manipulate the axes and those that relate to grids and labels (cf.  Figure 7-4 ): 

 In   [ 13 ] :   plt . plot ( y . cumsum ( ) ) 
           plt . grid ( False ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_04') 
 
 
 Turns off the grid. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-4.  Plot without grid 
 

 Other options for  plt.axis()  are given in  Table 7-1 , the majority of which have to be passed as a  string  object. 
 
 Table 7-1.  Options for plt.axis() 
 
 
 Parameter 
 Description 
 
 
 
 
 Empty 
 Returns current axis limits 
 
 
 off 
 Turns axis lines and labels off 
 
 
 equal 
 Leads to equal scaling 
 
 
 scaled 
 Equal scaling via dimension changes 
 
 
 tight 
 Makes all data visible (tightens limits) 
 
 
 image 
 Makes all data visible (with data limits) 
 
 
 [xmin, xmax, ymin, ymax] 
 Sets limits to given ( list  of) values 
 
 
 

 In addition, you can directly set the minimum and maximum values of each axis by using  plt.xlim()  and  plt.ylim() . The following code provides an example whose output is shown in  Figure 7-5 : 

 In   [ 14 ]:   plt . plot ( y . cumsum ()) 
          plt . xlim ( - 1 ,   20 ) 
          plt . ylim ( np . min ( y . cumsum ())   -   1 , 
                   np . max ( y . cumsum ())   +   1 ); 
          # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_05') 

 
 
 Figure 7-5.  Plot with custom axis limits 
 

 For the sake of better readability, a plot usually contains a number of labels—e.g., a title and labels describing the nature of  x  and  y  values. These are added by the functions  plt.title ,  plt.xlabel , and  plt.ylabel , respectively. By default,  plot  plots continuous lines, even if discrete data points are provided. The plotting of discrete points is accomplished by choosing a different style option.  Figure 7-6  overlays (red) points and a (blue) line with line width of 1.5 points: 

 In   [ 15 ] :   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) )    
           plt . plot ( y . cumsum ( ) ,   ' b ' ,   lw = 1.5 )    
           plt . plot ( y . cumsum ( ) ,   ' ro ' )    
           plt . xlabel ( ' index ' )    
           plt . ylabel ( ' value ' )    
           plt . title ( ' A Simple Plot ' ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_06') 
 
 
 Increases the size of the figure. 
 
 Plots the data as a line in blue with line width of 1.5 points. 
 
 Plots the data as red (thick) dots. 
 
 Places a label on the x-axis. 
 
 Places a label on the y-axis. 
 
 Places a title. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-6.  Plot with typical labels 
 

 By default,  plt.plot()  supports the color abbreviations in  Table 7-2 . 
 
 Table 7-2.  Standard color abbreviations 
 
 
 Character 
 Color 
 
 
 
 
 b 
 Blue 
 
 
 g 
 Green 
 
 
 r 
 Red 
 
 
 c 
 Cyan 
 
 
 m 
 Magenta 
 
 
 y 
 Yellow 
 
 
 k 
 Black 
 
 
 w 
 White 
 
 
 

 In terms of line and/or point styles,  plt.plot()  supports the characters listed in  Table 7-3 . 
 
 Table 7-3.  Standard style characters 
 
 
 Character 
 Symbol 
 
 
 
 
 - 
 Solid line style 
 
 
 -- 
 Dashed line style 
 
 
 -. 
 Dash-dot line style 
 
 
 : 
 Dotted line style 
 
 
 . 
 Point marker 
 
 
 , 
 Pixel marker 
 
 
 o 
 Circle marker 
 
 
 v 
 Triangle_down marker 
 
 
 0 
 Triangle_up marker 
 
 
 < 
 Triangle_left marker 
 
 
 > 
 Triangle_right marker 
 
 
 1 
 Tri_down marker 
 
 
 2 
 Tri_up marker 
 
 
 3 
 Tri_left marker 
 
 
 4 
 Tri_right marker 
 
 
 s 
 Square marker 
 
 
 p 
 Pentagon marker 
 
 
 0 
 Star marker 
 
 
 h 
 Hexagon1 marker 
 
 
 H 
 Hexagon2 marker 
 
 
 0 
 Plus marker 
 
 
 x 
 X marker 
 
 
 D 
 Diamond marker 
 
 
 d 
 Thin diamond marker 
 
 
 `pass:[ 
 ]` 
 
 
 Vline marker 
 0 
 
 
 

 Any color abbreviation can be combined with any style character. In this way, you can make sure that different data sets are easily distinguished. As we will see, the plotting style will also be reflected in the legend. 
 













 
 Two-Dimensional Data Set 

 Plotting one-dimensional data can be considered a special case. In general, data sets will consist of multiple separate subsets of data. The handling of such data sets follows the same rules with  matplotlib  as with one-dimensional data. However, a number of additional issues might arise in such a context. For example, two data sets might have such a different scaling that they cannot be plotted using the same y- and/or x-axis scaling. Another issue might be that you may want to visualize two different data sets in different ways, e.g., one by a line plot and the other by a bar plot. 

 The following code generates a two-dimensional sample data set as a  NumPy   ndarray  object of shape 20 × 2 with standard normally distributed (pseudo-)random numbers. On this array, the method  cumsum()  is called to calculate the cumulative sum of the sample data along axis 0 (i.e., the first dimension): 

 In   [ 16 ]:   y   =   np . random . standard_normal (( 20 ,   2 )) . cumsum ( axis = 0 ) 

 In general, you can also pass such two-dimensional arrays to  plt.plot . It will then automatically interpret the contained data as separate data sets (along axis 1, i.e., the second dimension). A respective plot is shown in  Figure 7-7 : 

 In   [ 17 ]:   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 )) 
          plt . plot ( y ,   lw = 1.5 ) 
          plt . plot ( y ,   'ro' ) 
          plt . xlabel ( 'index' ) 
          plt . ylabel ( 'value' ) 
          plt . title ( 'A Simple Plot' ); 
          # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_07') 

 
 
 Figure 7-7.  Plot with two data sets 
 

 In such a case, further annotations might be helpful to better read the plot. You can add individual labels to each data set and have them listed in the legend.  plt.legend()  accepts different locality parameters.  0  stands for  best location , in the sense that as little data as possible is hidden by the legend.  Figure 7-8  shows the plot of the two data sets, this time with a legend. In the generating code, we now do not pass the  ndarray  object as a whole but rather access the two data subsets separately ( y[:, 0]  and  y[:, 0] ), which allows to attach individual labels to them: 

 In   [ 18 ] :   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   0 ] ,   lw = 1.5 ,   label = ' 1st ' )    
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   1 ] ,   lw = 1.5 ,   label = ' 2nd ' )    
           plt . plot ( y ,   ' ro ' ) 
           plt . legend ( loc = 0 )    
           plt . xlabel ( ' index ' ) 
           plt . ylabel ( ' value ' ) 
           plt . title ( ' A Simple Plot ' ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_08') 
 
 
 Defines labels for the data sub-sets. 
 
 Places a legend in the  best  location. 
 

 Further location options for  plt.legend()  include those presented in  Table 7-4 . 
 
 Table 7-4.  Options for plt.legend() 
 
 
 Loc 
 Description 
 
 
 
 
 Empty 
 Automatic 
 
 
 0 
 Best possible 
 
 
 1 
 Upper right 
 
 
 2 
 Upper left 
 
 
 3 
 Lower left 
 
 
 4 
 Lower right 
 
 
 5 
 Right 
 
 
 6 
 Center left 
 
 
 7 
 Center right 
 
 
 8 
 Lower center 
 
 
 9 
 Upper center 
 
 
 10 
 Center 
 
 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-8.  Plot with labeled data sets 
 

 Multiple data sets with a similar scaling, like simulated paths for the same financial risk factor, can be plotted using a single y-axis. However, often data sets show rather different scalings and the plotting of such data with a single y scale generally leads to a significant loss of visual information. To illustrate the effect, we scale the first of the two data subsets by a factor of 100 and plot the data again (cf.  Figure 7-9 ): 

 In   [ 19 ] :   y [ : ,   0 ]   =   y [ : ,   0 ]   *   100    
 
 In   [ 20 ] :   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   0 ] ,   lw = 1.5 ,   label = ' 1st ' ) 
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   1 ] ,   lw = 1.5 ,   label = ' 2nd ' ) 
           plt . plot ( y ,   ' ro ' ) 
           plt . legend ( loc = 0 ) 
           plt . xlabel ( ' index ' ) 
           plt . ylabel ( ' value ' ) 
           plt . title ( ' A Simple Plot ' ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_09') 
 
 
 Re-scales the first data sub-set. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-9.  Plot with two differently scaled data sets 
 

 Inspection of  Figure 7-9  reveals that the first data set is still “visually readable,” while the second data set now looks like a straight line with the new scaling of the y-axis. In a sense, information about the second data set now gets “visually lost.” There are two basic approaches to resolve this problem: 

 
 
 Use of two y-axes (left/right) 
 
 
 Use of two subplots (upper/lower, left/right) 
 
 

 Let us first introduce a second y-axis into the plot.  Figure 7-10  now has two different y-axes. The left y-axis is for the first data set while the right y-axis is for the second. Consequently, there are also two legends: 

 In   [ 21 ] :   fig ,   ax1   =   plt . subplots ( )    
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   0 ] ,   ' b ' ,   lw = 1.5 ,   label = ' 1st ' ) 
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   0 ] ,   ' ro ' ) 
           plt . legend ( loc = 8 ) 
           plt . xlabel ( ' index ' ) 
           plt . ylabel ( ' value 1st ' ) 
           plt . title ( ' A Simple Plot ' ) 
           ax2   =   ax1 . twinx ( )    
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   1 ] ,   ' g ' ,   lw = 1.5 ,   label = ' 2nd ' ) 
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   1 ] ,   ' ro ' ) 
           plt . legend ( loc = 0 ) 
           plt . ylabel ( ' value 2nd ' ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_10') 
 
 
 Defines the  figure  and  axis  objects. 
 
 Creates a second  axis  object that shares the x-axis. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-10.  Plot with two data sets and two y-axes 
 

 The key lines of code are those that help manage the axes. These are the ones that follow: 

 fig ,   ax1   =   plt . subplots () 
 ax2   =   ax1 . twinx () 

 By using the  plt.subplots()  function, we get direct access to the underlying plotting objects (the figure, subplots, etc.). It allows, for example, to generate a second subplot that shares the x-axis with the first subplot. In  Figure 7-10  we have, then, actually two subplots that  overlay  each other. 

 Next, consider the case of two  separate  subplots. This option gives even more freedom to handle the two data sets, as  Figure 7-11  illustrates: 

 In   [ 22 ] :   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           plt . subplot ( 211 )    
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   0 ] ,   lw = 1.5 ,   label = ' 1st ' ) 
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   0 ] ,   ' ro ' ) 
           plt . legend ( loc = 0 ) 
           plt . ylabel ( ' value ' ) 
           plt . title ( ' A Simple Plot ' ) 
           plt . subplot ( 212 )    
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   1 ] ,   ' g ' ,   lw = 1.5 ,   label = ' 2nd ' ) 
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   1 ] ,   ' ro ' ) 
           plt . legend ( loc = 0 ) 
           plt . xlabel ( ' index ' ) 
           plt . ylabel ( ' value ' ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_11') 
 
 
 Defines the upper subplot 1. 
 
 Defines the lower subplot 2. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-11.  Plot with two subplots 
 

 The placing of subplots in a  matplotlib   figure  object is accomplished by the use of a special coordinate system.  plt.subplot()  takes as arguments three integers for  numrows ,  numcols , and  fignum  (either separated by commas or not).  numrows  specifies the number of  rows ,  numcols  the number of  columns , and  fignum  the number of the  subplot , starting with 1 and ending with  numrows * numcols . For example, a figure with nine equally sized subplots would have  numrows=3 ,  numcols=3 , and  fignum=1,2,...,9 . The lower-right subplot would have the following “coordinates”:  plt.subplot(3, 3, 9) . 

 Sometimes, it might be necessary or desired to choose two different plot types to visualize such data. With the subplot approach you have the freedom to combine arbitrary kinds of plots that  matplotlib  offers. 1   Figure 7-12  combines a line/point plot with a bar chart: 

 In   [ 23 ] :   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           plt . subplot ( 121 ) 
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   0 ] ,   lw = 1.5 ,   label = ' 1st ' ) 
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   0 ] ,   ' ro ' ) 
           plt . legend ( loc = 0 ) 
           plt . xlabel ( ' index ' ) 
           plt . ylabel ( ' value ' ) 
           plt . title ( ' 1st Data Set ' ) 
           plt . subplot ( 122 ) 
           plt . bar ( np . arange ( len ( y ) ) ,   y [ : ,   1 ] ,   width = 0.5 , 
                   color = ' g ' ,   label = ' 2nd ' )    
           plt . legend ( loc = 0 ) 
           plt . xlabel ( ' index ' ) 
           plt . title ( ' 2nd Data Set ' ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_12') 
 
 
 Creates a  bar  subplot. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-12.  Plot combining line/point subplot with bar subplot 
 
 













 
 Other Plot Styles 

 When it comes to two-dimensional plotting, line and point plots are probably the most important ones in finance; this is because many data sets embody time series data, which generally is visualized by such plots.  Chapter 8  addresses financial times series data in detail. However, for the moment this section sticks with a two-dimensional data set of random numbers and illustrates some alternative, and for financial applications useful, visualization approaches. 

 The first is the  scatter plot , where the values of one data set serve as the  x  values for the other data set.  Figure 7-13  shows such a plot. Such a plot type is used, for example, for plotting the returns of one financial time series against those of another one. For this example we will use a new two-dimensional data set with some more data: 

 In   [ 24 ] :   y   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( 1000 ,   2 ) )    
 
 In   [ 25 ] :   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           plt . plot ( y [ : ,   0 ] ,   y [ : ,   1 ] ,   ' ro ' )    
           plt . xlabel ( ' 1st ' ) 
           plt . ylabel ( ' 2nd ' ) 
           plt . title ( ' Scatter Plot ' ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_13') 
 
 
 Creates a larger data set with random numbers. 
 
 Scatter plot via the  plt.plot()  function. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-13.  Scatter plot via plot function 
 

 matplotlib  also provides a specific function to generate scatter plots. It basically works in the same way, but provides some additional features.  Figure 7-14  shows the corresponding scatter plot to  Figure 7-13 , this time generated using the  plt.scatter()  function: 

 In   [ 26 ] :   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           plt . scatter ( y [ : ,   0 ] ,   y [ : ,   1 ] ,   marker = ' o ' )    
           plt . xlabel ( ' 1st ' ) 
           plt . ylabel ( ' 2nd ' ) 
           plt . title ( ' Scatter Plot ' ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_14') 
 
 
 Scatter plot via  plt.scatter()  function. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-14.  Scatter plot via scatter function 
 

 The  plt.scatter()  plotting function, for example, allows the addition of a third dimension, which can be visualized through different colors and be described by the use of a color bar.  Figure 7-15  shows a scatter plot where there is a third dimension illustrated by different colors of the single dots and with a color bar as a legend for the colors. To this end, the following code generates a third data set with random data, this time with integers between 0 and 10: 

 In   [ 27 ] :   c   =   np . random . randint ( 0 ,   10 ,   len ( y ) ) 
 
 In   [ 28 ] :   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           plt . scatter ( y [ : ,   0 ] ,   y [ : ,   1 ] , 
                       c = c ,    
                       cmap = ' coolwarm ' ,    
                       marker = ' o ' )    
           plt . colorbar ( ) 
           plt . xlabel ( ' 1st ' ) 
           plt . ylabel ( ' 2nd ' ) 
           plt . title ( ' Scatter Plot ' ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_15') 
 
 
 The third data sets is included. 
 
 The color map is chosen. 
 
 The marker is defined to be a thick dot. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-15.  Scatter plot with third dimension 
 

 Another type of plot, the  histogram , is also often used in the context of financial returns.  Figure 7-16  puts the frequency values of the two data sets next to each other in the  same plot: 

 In   [ 29 ] :   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           plt . hist ( y ,   label = [ ' 1st ' ,   ' 2nd ' ] ,   bins = 25 )    
           plt . legend ( loc = 0 ) 
           plt . xlabel ( ' value ' ) 
           plt . ylabel ( ' frequency ' ) 
           plt . title ( ' Histogram ' ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_16') 
 
 
 The histogram plot via the  plt.hist()  function. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-16.  Histogram for two data sets 
 

 Since the histogram is such an important plot type for financial applications, let us take a closer look at the use of  plt.hist . The following example illustrates the parameters that are supported: 

 plt.hist(x, bins=10, range=None, normed=False, weights=None, cumulative=False, bottom=None, histtype='bar', align='mid', orientation='vertical', rwidth=None, log=False, color=None, label=None, stacked=False, hold=None, **kwargs) 

 Table 7-5  provides a description of the main parameters of the  plt.hist  function. 
 
 Table 7-5.  Parameters for plt.hist() 
 
 
 Parameter 
 Description 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 list  object(s),  ndarray  object 
 
 
 bins 
 Number of bins 
 
 
 range 
 Lower and upper range of bins 
 
 
 normed 
 Norming such that integral value is 1 
 
 
 weights 
 Weights for every value in  x 
 
 
 cumulative 
 Every bin contains the counts of the lower bins 
 
 
 histtype 
 Options (strings):  bar ,  barstacked ,  step ,  stepfilled 
 
 
 align 
 Options (strings):  left ,  mid ,  right 
 
 
 orientation 
 Options (strings):  horizontal ,  vertical 
 
 
 rwidth 
 Relative width of the bars 
 
 
 log 
 Log scale 
 
 
 color 
 Color per data set (array-like) 
 
 
 label 
 String or sequence of strings for labels 
 
 
 stacked 
 Stacks multiple data sets 
 
 
 

 Figure 7-17  shows a similar plot; this time, the data of the two data sets is stacked in the histogram: 

 In   [ 30 ]:   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 )) 
          plt . hist ( y ,   label = [ '1st' ,   '2nd' ],   color = [ 'b' ,   'g' ], 
                      stacked = True ,   bins = 20 ,   alpha = 0.5 ) 
          plt . legend ( loc = 0 ) 
          plt . xlabel ( 'value' ) 
          plt . ylabel ( 'frequency' ) 
          plt . title ( 'Histogram' ); 
          # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_17') 

 
 
 Figure 7-17.  Stacked histogram for two data sets 
 

 Another useful plot type is the  boxplot . Similar to the histogram, the boxplot allows both a concise overview of the characteristics of a data set and easy comparison of multiple data sets.  Figure 7-18  shows such a plot for our data set: 

 In   [ 31 ] :   fig ,   ax   =   plt . subplots ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           plt . boxplot ( y )    
           plt . setp ( ax ,   xticklabels = [ ' 1st ' ,   ' 2nd ' ] )    
           plt . xlabel ( ' data set ' ) 
           plt . ylabel ( ' value ' ) 
           plt . title ( ' Boxplot ' ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_18') 
 
 
 Boxplot via the  plt.boxplot()  function. 
 
 Sets individual x labels. 
 

 This last example uses the function  plt.setp() , which sets properties for a (set of) plotting instance(s). For example, considering a line plot generated by: 

 line   =   plt . plot ( data ,   'r' ) 

 the following code: 

 plt . setp ( line ,   linestyle = '--' ) 

 changes the style of the line to “dashed.” This way, you can easily change parameters after the plotting instance (“artist object”) has been generated. 

 
 
 Figure 7-18.  Boxplot for two data sets 
 

 As a final illustration in this section, consider a mathematically inspired plot that can also be found as  an example in the gallery for  matplotlib . It plots a function and highlights graphically the area below the function from a lower and to an upper limit—in other words, the integral value of the function between the lower and upper limits highlighted as an area. The integral (value) to be illustrated is  
   
     ∫   a   b   
     f 
     
       ( 
       x 
       ) 
     
     d 
     x 
   
  with  
   
     f 
     
       ( 
       x 
       ) 
     
     = 
     1   2 
     · 
     e   x   
     + 
     1 
   
 ,  
   
     a 
     = 
     1   2 
   
  and  
   
     b 
     = 
     3   2 
   
 .  Figure 7-19  shows the resulting plot and demonstrates that  matplotlib  seamlessly handles  LaTeX  type setting for the inclusion of mathematical formulae into plots. First, the function definition, integral limits as variables and data sets for the x and y values. 

 In   [ 32 ] :   def   func ( x ) : 
               return   0.5   *   np . exp ( x )   +   1    
           a ,   b   =   0.5 ,   1.5    
           x   =   np . linspace ( 0 ,   2 )    
           y   =   func ( x )    
           Ix   =   np . linspace ( a ,   b )    
           Iy   =   func ( Ix )   
           verts   =   [ ( a ,   0 ) ]   +   list ( zip ( Ix ,   Iy ) )   +   [ ( b ,   0 ) ]    
 
 
 The function definition. 
 
 The integral limits. 
 
 The x values to plot the function. 
 
 The y values to plot the function. 
 
 The x values within the integral limits. 
 
 The y values within the integral limits. 
 
 The  list  object with multiple  tuple  objects representing coordinates for the polygon to be plotted. 
 

 Second, the plotting itself which is a bit involved due to the many single objects to be placed explicitly. 

 In   [ 33 ] :   from   matplotlib.patches   import   Polygon 
           fig ,   ax   =   plt . subplots ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           plt . plot ( x ,   y ,   ' b ' ,   linewidth = 2 )    
           plt . ylim ( ymin = 0 )    
           poly   =   Polygon ( verts ,   facecolor = ' 0.7 ' ,   edgecolor = ' 0.5 ' )    
           ax . add_patch ( poly )    
           plt . text ( 0.5   *   ( a   +   b ) ,   1 ,   r ' $ \ int_a^b f(x) \ mathrm{d}x$ ' , 
                    horizontalalignment = ' center ' ,   fontsize = 20 )    
           plt . figtext ( 0.9 ,   0.075 ,   ' $x$ ' )    
           plt . figtext ( 0.075 ,   0.9 ,   ' $f(x)$ ' )    
           ax . set_xticks ( ( a ,   b ) )    
           ax . set_xticklabels ( ( ' $a$ ' ,   ' $b$ ' ) )    
           ax . set_yticks ( [ func ( a ) ,   func ( b ) ] )    
           ax . set_yticklabels ( ( ' $f(a)$ ' ,   ' $f(b)$ ' ) )    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_19') 
 Out [ 33 ] :   [ < matplotlib . text . Text   at   0x1066af438 > ,   < matplotlib . text . Text   at   0x10669ba20 > ] 
 
 
 Plots the function values as a blue line. 
 
 Defines the minimum y value for the ordinate axis. 
 
 Plots the polygon (integral area) in gray. 
 
 Places the integral formula in the plot. 
 
 Places axes labels. 
 
 Places the x labels. 
 
 Places the y labels. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-19.  Exponential function, integral area, and LaTeX labels 
 
 





 













 
 Static 3D Plotting 

 There are not too many fields in finance that really benefit from visualization in three dimensions. However, one application area is volatility surfaces showing implied volatilities simultaneously for a number of times-to-maturity and strikes. In what follows, the code artificially generates a plot that resembles a volatility surface. To this end, consider: 

 
 
 Strike values  between 50 and 150 
 
 
 Times-to-maturity  between 0.5 and 2.5 years 
 
 

 This provides a two-dimensional coordinate system.  NumPy ’s  np.meshgrid()  function can generate such a system out of two one-dimensional  ndarray  objects: 

 In   [ 34 ] :   strike   =   np . linspace ( 50 ,   150 ,   24 )    
 
 In   [ 35 ] :   ttm   =   np . linspace ( 0.5 ,   2.5 ,   24 )    
 
 In   [ 36 ] :   strike ,   ttm   =   np . meshgrid ( strike ,   ttm )    
 
 In   [ 37 ] :   strike [ : 2 ] . round ( 1 )    
 Out [ 37 ] :   array ( [ [   50.   ,    54.3 ,    58.7 ,    63.   ,    67.4 ,    71.7 ,    76.1 ,    80.4 ,    84.8 , 
                    89.1 ,    93.5 ,    97.8 ,   102.2 ,   106.5 ,   110.9 ,   115.2 ,   119.6 ,   123.9 , 
                   128.3 ,   132.6 ,   137.   ,   141.3 ,   145.7 ,   150.   ] , 
                  [   50.   ,    54.3 ,    58.7 ,    63.   ,    67.4 ,    71.7 ,    76.1 ,    80.4 ,    84.8 , 
                    89.1 ,    93.5 ,    97.8 ,   102.2 ,   106.5 ,   110.9 ,   115.2 ,   119.6 ,   123.9 , 
                   128.3 ,   132.6 ,   137.   ,   141.3 ,   145.7 ,   150.   ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 38 ] :   iv   =   ( strike   -   100 )   * *   2   /   ( 100   *   strike )   /   ttm    
 
 In   [ 39 ] :   iv [ : 5 ,   : 3 ]    
 Out [ 39 ] :   array ( [ [ 1.          ,   0.76695652 ,   0.58132045 ] , 
                  [ 0.85185185 ,   0.65333333 ,   0.4951989   ] , 
                  [ 0.74193548 ,   0.56903226 ,   0.43130227 ] , 
                  [ 0.65714286 ,   0.504       ,   0.38201058 ] , 
                  [ 0.58974359 ,   0.45230769 ,   0.34283001 ] ] ) 
 
 
 The  ndarray  object with the strike values. 
 
 The  ndarray  object with the times-to-maturity values. 
 
 The two two-dimensional  ndarray  objects (grids) created. 
 
 The dummy implied volatility values. 
 

 The plot resulting from the following code is shown in  Figure 7-20 : 

 In   [ 40 ] :   from   mpl_toolkits.mplot3d   import   Axes3D    
           fig   =   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           ax   =   fig . gca ( projection = ' 3d ' )    
           surf   =   ax . plot_surface ( strike ,   ttm ,   iv ,   rstride = 2 ,   cstride = 2 , 
                                  cmap = plt . cm . coolwarm ,   linewidth = 0.5 , 
                                  antialiased = True )    
           ax . set_xlabel ( ' strike ' )    
           ax . set_ylabel ( ' time-to-maturity ' )    
           ax . set_zlabel ( ' implied volatility ' )    
           fig . colorbar ( surf ,   shrink = 0.5 ,   aspect = 5 ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_20') 
 
 
 Imports the relevant 3D plotting features. 
 
 Sets up a canvas for 3D plotting. 
 
 Creates the 3D plot. 
 
 Sets the x label. 
 
 Sets the y label. 
 
 Sets the z label. 
 
 This creates a color bar. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-20.  3D surface plot for (dummy) implied volatilities 
 

 Table 7-6  provides a description of the different parameters the  plt.plot_surface()  function can take. 
 
 Table 7-6.  Parameters for plot_surface 
 
 
 Parameter 
 Description 
 
 
 
 
 X, Y, Z 
 Data values as 2D arrays 
 
 
 rstride 
 Array row stride (step size) 
 
 
 cstride 
 Array column stride (step size) 
 
 
 color 
 Color of the surface patches 
 
 
 cmap 
 A colormap for the surface patches 
 
 
 facecolors 
 Face colors for the individual patches 
 
 
 norm 
 An instance of  Normalize  to map values to colors 
 
 
 vmin 
 Minimum value to map 
 
 
 vmax 
 Maximum value to map 
 
 
 shade 
 Whether to shade the face colors 
 
 
 

 As with two-dimensional plots, the line style can be replaced by single points or, as in what follows, single triangles.  Figure 7-21  plots the same data as a 3D scatter plot, but now also with a different viewing angle, using the  view_init()  method to set it: 

 In   [ 41 ] :   fig   =   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           ax   =   fig . add_subplot ( 111 ,   projection = ' 3d ' ) 
           ax . view_init ( 30 ,   60 )    
           ax . scatter ( strike ,   ttm ,   iv ,   zdir = ' z ' ,   s = 25 , 
                      c = ' b ' ,   marker = ' ^ ' )    
           ax . set_xlabel ( ' strike ' ) 
           ax . set_ylabel ( ' time-to-maturity ' ) 
           ax . set_zlabel ( ' implied volatility ' ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch07/mpl_21') 
 
 
 Sets the viewing angle. 
 
 Creates a 3D scatter plot. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-21.  3D scatter plot for (dummy) implied volatilities 
 
 













 
 Interactive 2D Plotting 

 matplotlib  allows to create plots that are statics bitmap objects or of PDF format. Nowadays, there are many libraries available to create interactive plots based on the  D3.js  standard. Such plots make, among others, zooming in and out or hover effects for data inspection possible. They can in general also be easily embedded in web pages. 

 A popular platform and plotting library is  Plotly . It is dedicated to visualization for data science and is in wide spread use around the world. Major benefits of Plotly are its tight integration with the Python ecosystem and the ease of use — in particular when combined with  pandas   DataFrame  objects and the wrapper package  Cufflinks . 

 For some functionality, a free account with Plotly is required for which users can register on the platform itself under  http://plot.ly . Once the credentials are granted they should be stored locally for permanent use afterwards. All details in the regard are found under  Getting Started with Plotly for Python . 

 This section focuses on selected aspects only in that  Cufflinks  is used exclusively to create interactive plots from data stored in  DataFrame  objects. 








 
 Basic Plots 

 To get started from within a Jupyter Notebook context, some imports are required and the  notebook mode  should be turned on. 

 In   [ 42 ] :   import   pandas   as   pd 
 
 In   [ 43 ] :   import   cufflinks   as   cf    
 
 In   [ 44 ] :   import   plotly.offline   as   plyo    
 
 In   [ 45 ] :   plyo . init_notebook_mode ( connected = True )    
 
 
 Imports  Cufflinks . 
 
 Imports the offline plotting capabilities of  Plotly . 
 
 Turns on the notebook plotting mode. 
 
 Tip 
 With  Plotly , there is also the option to get the plots rendered on the  Plotly  servers. However, the notebook mode is generally much faster, in particular when dealing with larger data sets. However, some functionality, like the streaming plot service of  Plotly , is only available via communication with the server. 
 

 The examples to follow rely again on random numbers, this time stored in a  DataFrame  object with  DatetimeIndex , i.e. as a time series data. 

 In   [ 46 ] :   a   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( 250 ,   5 ) ) . cumsum ( axis = 0 )    
 
 In   [ 47 ] :   index   =   pd . date_range ( ' 2019-1-1 ' ,    
                                 freq = ' B ' ,    
                                 periods = len ( a ) )   
 
 In   [ 48 ] :   df   =   pd . DataFrame ( 100   +   5   *   a ,    
                             columns = list ( ' abcde ' ) ,    
                             index = index )    
 
 In   [ 49 ] :   df . head ( )    
 Out [ 49 ] :                        a             b             c            d             e 
           2019 - 01 - 01    109.037535     98.693865    104.474094    96.878857    100.621936 
           2019 - 01 - 02    107.598242     97.005738    106.789189    97.966552    100.175313 
           2019 - 01 - 03    101.639668    100.332253    103.183500    99.747869    107.902901 
           2019 - 01 - 04     98.500363    101.208283    100.966242    94.023898    104.387256 
           2019 - 01 - 07     93.941632    103.319168    105.674012    95.891062     86.547934 
 
 
 The standard normally distributed (pseudo-)random numbers. 
 
 Start date for the  DatetimeIndex  object. 
 
 The frequency (” business daily “). 
 
 The number of periods needed. 
 
 The raw data is linearly transformed. 
 
 The column headers as single characters. 
 
 The  DatetimeIndex  object. 
 
 The first five rows of data. 
 

 Cufflinks  adds a new method to the  DataFrame  class:  df.iplot() . This method uses  Plotly  in the backend to create interactive plots. The code examples in this section all make use of the option to download the interactive plot as a static bitmap, which in turn embedded in the text. In the Jupyter Notebook environment, the created plots are all interactive. The result of the following code is shown as <<>>. 

 In   [ 50 ] :   plyo . iplot (    
               df . iplot ( asFigure = True ) ,    
               # image ='png',   
               filename = ' ply_01 '    
           ) 
 
 
 This makes use of the offline (notebook mode) capabilities of  Plotly . 
 
 The  df.iplot()  method is called with parameter  asFigure=True  to allow for local plotting and embedding. 
 
 The  image  option provides in addition a static bitmap version of the plot. 
 
 The filename for the bitmap to be saved is specified (file type extension is added automatically). 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-22.  Line plot for time series data with  Plotly ,  pandas  and  Cufflinks 
 

 As with  matplotlib  in general or also with the  pandas  plotting functionality, there are multiple parameters available to customize such plots (see  Figure 7-23 ): 

 In   [ 51 ] :   plyo . iplot ( 
               df [ [ ' a ' ,   ' b ' ] ] . iplot ( asFigure = True , 
                        theme = ' polar ' ,    
                        title = ' A Time Series Plot ' ,    
                        xTitle = ' date ' ,    
                        yTitle = ' value ' ,    
                        mode = { ' a ' :   ' markers ' ,   ' b ' :   ' lines+markers ' } ,    
                        symbol = { ' a ' :   ' dot ' ,   ' b ' :   ' diamond ' } ,    
                        size = 3.5 ,    
                        colors = { ' a ' :   ' blue ' ,   ' b ' :   ' magenta ' } ,    
                                   ) , 
               # image ='png', 
               filename = ' ply_02 ' 
           ) 
 
 
 Selects a theme (plotting style) for the plot. 
 
 Adds a title. 
 
 Adds a x label. 
 
 Adds a y label. 
 
 Defines the plotting  mode  (line, marker, etc.) by column. 
 
 Defines the symbols to be used as markers by column. 
 
 Fixes the size for all markers. 
 
 Specifies the plotting color by column 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-23.  Line plot for two columns of the  DataFrame  object with customizations 
 

 Similar to  matplotlib ,  Plotly  allows for a number of different plotting types. Plotting available via  Cufflinks  are:  chart, scatter, bar, box, spread, ratio, heatmap, surface, histogram, bubble, bubble3d, scatter3d, scattergeo, ohlc, candle, pie  and  choroplet . As an example for a plotting type different from a line plot consider the histogram (see [Link to Come]): 

 In   [ 52 ] :   plyo . iplot ( 
               df . iplot ( kind = ' hist ' ,    
                        subplots = True ,    
                        bins = 15 ,    
                        asFigure = True ) , 
               # image ='png', 
               filename = ' ply_03 ' 
           ) 
 
 
 Specifies the plotting type. 
 
 Requires separate subplots for every column. 
 
 Sets the  bins  parameters (buckets to be used = bars to be plotted). 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-24.  Histograms per column of the  DataFrame  object 
 
 













 
 Financial Plots 

 The combination of  Ploty ,  Cufflinks  and  pandas  proves particularly powerful when working with financial time series data.  Cufflinks  provides specialized functionality to create typical financial plots and to add typical financial charting elements, such as the Relative-Strength Indicator (RSI), to name but one example. To this end, a persistent  QuantFig  object is created that can be plotted the same way as a  DataFrame  object with  Cufflinks . 

 This sub-section uses a real financial data sets: time series data for the EUR/USD exchange rate (source: FXCM Forex Capital Markets Ltd.). 

 In   [ 53 ] :   # data from FXCM Forex Capital Markets Ltd. 
           raw   =   pd . read_csv ( ' ../../source/fxcm_eur_usd_eod_data.csv ' , 
                            index_col = 0 ,   parse_dates = True )    
 
 In   [ 54 ] :   raw . info ( )    
 
           < class   ' pandas . core . frame . DataFrame ' > 
           DatetimeIndex :   2820   entries ,   2007 - 06 - 03   to   2017 - 05 - 31 
           Data   columns   ( total   10   columns ) : 
           Time            2820   non - null   object 
           OpenBid         2820   non - null   float64 
           HighBid         2820   non - null   float64 
           LowBid          2820   non - null   float64 
           CloseBid        2820   non - null   float64 
           OpenAsk         2820   non - null   float64 
           HighAsk         2820   non - null   float64 
           LowAsk          2820   non - null   float64 
           CloseAsk        2820   non - null   float64 
           TotalTicks      2820   non - null   int64 
           dtypes :   float64 ( 8 ) ,   int64 ( 1 ) ,   object ( 1 ) 
           memory   usage :   242.3 +   KB 
 
 
 In   [ 55 ] :   quotes   =   raw [ [ ' OpenAsk ' ,   ' HighAsk ' ,   ' LowAsk ' ,   ' CloseAsk ' ] ]    
           quotes   =   quotes . iloc [ - 60 : ]    
           quotes . tail ( )    
 Out [ 55 ] :               OpenAsk    HighAsk     LowAsk    CloseAsk 
           Date 
           2017 - 05 - 27    1.11808    1.11808    1.11743     1.11788 
           2017 - 05 - 28    1.11788    1.11906    1.11626     1.11660 
           2017 - 05 - 29    1.11660    1.12064    1.11100     1.11882 
           2017 - 05 - 30    1.11882    1.12530    1.11651     1.12434 
           2017 - 05 - 31    1.12434    1.12574    1.12027     1.12133 
 
 
 Reads the financial data from a Comma Separated Value (CSV) file. 
 
 The resulting  DataFrame  objects consists of multiple columns and more than 2,800 data rows. 
 
 This selects four columns from the  DataFrame  object (Open-High-Low-Close of OHLC). 
 
 Only a few data rows are used for the visualization. 
 
 The final five rows of the resulting data set  quotes . 
 

 During instantiation, the  QuantFig  object takes the  DataFrame  object as input and allows for some basic customization. Plotting the data stored in the  QuantFig  object  qf  then happens with the  qf.iplot()  method (see  Figure 7-25 ). 

 In   [ 56 ] :   qf   =   cf . QuantFig ( 
                    quotes ,    
                    title = ' EUR/USD Exchange Rate ' ,    
                    legend = ' top ' ,    
                    name = ' EUR/USD '    
           ) 
 
 In   [ 57 ] :   plyo . iplot ( 
               qf . iplot ( asFigure = True ) , 
               # image ='png', 
               filename = ' qf_01 ' 
           ) 
 
 
 The  DataFrame  object is passed to the  QuantFig  constructor. 
 
 This adds a figure title. 
 
 The legend is placed at the top of the plot. 
 
 This gives the data set a name. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-25.  OHLC plot of EUR/USD data 
 

 Adding typical financial charting elements, such as Bollinger bands, happens via different methods available for the  QuantFig  object (see  Figure 7-26 ). 

 In   [ 58 ] :   qf . add_bollinger_bands ( periods = 15 ,    
                                  boll_std = 2 )    
 
 In   [ 59 ] :   plyo . iplot ( qf . iplot ( asFigure = True ) , 
                # image='png', 
                filename = ' qf_02 ' ) 
 
 
 The number of periods for the Bollinger band. 
 
 The number of standard deviations to be used for the band width. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-26.  OHLC plot of EUR/USD data with Bollinger band 
 

 Certain financial indicators, such as RSI, are added as a subplot (see  Figure 7-27 ). 

 In   [ 60 ] :   qf . add_rsi ( periods = 14 ,    
                     showbands = False )    
 
 In   [ 61 ] :   plyo . iplot ( 
                qf . iplot ( asFigure = True ) , 
                # image='png', 
                filename = ' qf_03 ' 
           ) 
 
 
 Fixes the RSI period. 
 
 Does not show an upper or lower band. 
 

 
 
 Figure 7-27.  OHLC plot of EUR/USD data with Bollinger band and RSI 
 
 





 













 
 Conclusions 

 matplotlib  can be considered both the benchmark and the workhorse when it comes to data visualization in  Python . It is tightly integrated with  NumPy  and  pandas . The basic functionality is easily and conveniently accessed. However, on the other hand,  matplotlib  is a rather mighty library with a somewhat complex API. This makes it impossible to give a broader overview of all the capabilities of  matplotlib  in this chapter. 

 This chapter introduces the basic functions of  matplotlib  for 2D and 3D plotting useful in many financial contexts. Other chapters provide further examples of how to use this fundamental library for visualization. 

 In addition to  matplotlib , this chapter covers  Plotly  in combination with  Cufflinks . This combination makes the creation of interactive  D3.js  plots a convenient affair since only a single method call on a  DataFrame  object is necessary in general. All technicalities are taken care of in the backend. Furthermore,  Cufflinks  provides with the  QuantFig  object an easy way to create typical financial plots with popular financial indicators. 
 













 
 Further Reading 

 The major resources for  matplotlib  can be found on the Web: 

 
 
 The home page of  matplotlib  is, of course, the best starting point:  http://matplotlib.org . 
 
 
 There’s a gallery with many useful examples:  http://matplotlib.org/gallery.html . 
 
 
 A tutorial for 2D plotting is found here:  http://matplotlib.org/users/pyplot_tutorial.html . 
 
 
 Another one for 3D plotting is here:  http://matplotlib.org/mpl_toolkits/mplot3d/tutorial.html . 
 
 

 It has become kind of a standard routine to consult the gallery, to look there for an appropriate visualization example, and to start with the corresponding example code. 

 The major resources for  Plotly  and  Cufflinks  are also online: 

 
 
 The major page:  http://plot.ly 
 
 
 A tutorial to get started with Python:  https://plot.ly/python/getting-started/ 
 
 
 The  Cufflinks  Github page:  https://github.com/santosjorge/cufflinks 
 
 
 







 1  For an overview of which plot types are available, visit the  matplotlib  gallery . 
 
 



 
 
   
   
 Chapter 8.  Financial Time Series 

 
 The only reason for time is so that everything doesn’t happen at once. 
 Albert Einstein 
 

 Financial time series data is one of the most important types of data in finance. This is data indexed by date and/or time. For example, prices of stocks over time represent financial time series data. Similarly, the EUR/USD exchange rate over time represents a financial time series; the exchange rate is quoted in brief intervals of time, and a collection of such quotes then is a time series of exchange rates. 

 There is no financial discipline that gets by without considering time an important factor. This mainly is the same as with physics and other sciences. The major tool to cope with time series data in Python is  pandas . Wes McKinney, the original and main author of  pandas , started developing the library when working as an analyst at AQR Capital Management, a large hedge fund. It is safe to say that  pandas  has been designed from the ground up to work with financial time series data. 

 The chapter is mainly based on two financial time series data sets in the form of Comma Separated Value (CSV) files. It proceeds along the following lines: 
 
 “Financial Data” 
 
 This section is about the basics of working with financial times series data using  pandas : data import, deriving summary statistics, calculating changes over time and resampling. 
 
 “Rolling Statistics” 
 
 In financial analysis, rolling statistics play an important role. These are statistics calculated in general over a fixed time interval the is  rolled forward  over the complete data set. A popular example are simple moving averages (SMAs). This section illustrates how  pandas  supports the calculation of such statistics. 
 
 “Correlation Analysis” 
 
 This section presents a case study based on financial time series data for the S&P 500 stock index and the VIX volatility index. It provides some support for the stylized fact that both indices are negatively correlated. 
 
 “High Frequency Data” 
 
 High frequency data, or tick data, has become commonplace in finance. This section works with tick data.  pandas  again proves powerful in handling such data sets. 
 
 






 
 Financial Data 

 This section works with a locally stored financial data set in the form of a CSV file. Technically, such files are simply text files with a data row structure characterized by commas separating single values. Before importing the data, first some package imports and customizations. 

 In   [ 1 ]:   import   numpy   as   np 
         import   pandas   as   pd 
         from   pylab   import   mpl ,   plt 
         plt . style . use ( 'seaborn' ) 
         mpl . rcParams [ 'font.family' ]   =   'serif' 
         % matplotlib   inline 








 
 Data Import 

 pandas  provides a number of different functions and  DataFrame  methods to import data stored in different formats (CSV, SQL, Excel, etc.) and to export data to different formats (see  Chapter 9  for more details). The following code uses the  pd.read_csv()  function to import the time series data set from the CSV file. 1 

 In   [ 2 ] :   filename   =   ' ../../source/tr_eikon_eod_data.csv '    
 
 In   [ 3 ] :   ! head   - 5   $ filename    
 
          Date , AAPL . O , MSFT . O , INTC . O , AMZN . O , GS . N , SPY , . SPX , . VIX , EUR = , XAU = , GDX , GLD 
          2010 - 01 - 04 , 30.57282657 , 30.95 , 20.88 , 133.9 , 173.08 , 113.33 , 1132.99 , 20.04 , 1.4411 , 1120.0 , 47.71 , 109.8 
          2010 - 01 - 05 , 30.625683660000004 , 30.96 , 20.87 , 134.69 , 176.14 , 113.63 , 1136.52 , 19.35 , 1.4368 , 1118.65 , 48.17 , 109.7 
          2010 - 01 - 06 , 30.138541290000003 , 30.77 , 20.8 , 132.25 , 174.26 , 113.71 , 1137.14 , 19.16 , 1.4412 , 1138.5 , 49.34 , 111.51 
          2010 - 01 - 07 , 30.082827060000003 , 30.452 , 20.6 , 130.0 , 177.67 , 114.19 , 1141.69 , 19.06 , 1.4318 , 1131.9 , 49.1 , 110.82 
 
 
 In   [ 4 ] :   data   =   pd . read_csv ( filename ,    
                             index_col = 0 ,   
                             parse_dates = True )    
 
 In   [ 5 ] :   data . info ( )    
 
          < class   ' pandas . core . frame . DataFrame ' > 
          DatetimeIndex :   1972   entries ,   2010 - 01 - 04   to   2017 - 10 - 31 
          Data   columns   ( total   12   columns ) : 
          AAPL . O      1972   non - null   float64 
          MSFT . O      1972   non - null   float64 
          INTC . O      1972   non - null   float64 
          AMZN . O      1972   non - null   float64 
          GS . N        1972   non - null   float64 
          SPY         1972   non - null   float64 
          . SPX        1972   non - null   float64 
          . VIX        1972   non - null   float64 
          EUR =        1972   non - null   float64 
          XAU =        1972   non - null   float64 
          GDX         1972   non - null   float64 
          GLD         1972   non - null   float64 
          dtypes :   float64 ( 12 ) 
          memory   usage :   200.3   KB 
 
 
 Specifies the path and file name . 
 
 Shows the first five rows of the raw data (Linux/Mac). 
 
 The file name passed to the  pd.read_csv()  function. 
 
 This specifies that the first column shall be handled as an index. 
 
 This in addition specifies that the index values are of type date-time. 
 
 The resulting  DataFrame  object. 
 

 At this stage, a financial analyst probably takes a first look at the data, either by inspection of the data or by visualizing it (see  Figure 8-1 ). 

 In   [ 6 ] :   data . head ( )    
 Out [ 6 ] :                  AAPL . O    MSFT . O    INTC . O    AMZN . O      GS . N       SPY       . SPX     . VIX    \
          Date 
          2010 - 01 - 04    30.572827    30.950     20.88    133.90    173.08    113.33    1132.99    20.04 
          2010 - 01 - 05    30.625684    30.960     20.87    134.69    176.14    113.63    1136.52    19.35 
          2010 - 01 - 06    30.138541    30.770     20.80    132.25    174.26    113.71    1137.14    19.16 
          2010 - 01 - 07    30.082827    30.452     20.60    130.00    177.67    114.19    1141.69    19.06 
          2010 - 01 - 08    30.282827    30.660     20.83    133.52    174.31    114.57    1144.98    18.13 
 
                        EUR =       XAU =      GDX       GLD 
          Date 
          2010 - 01 - 04    1.4411    1120.00    47.71    109.80 
          2010 - 01 - 05    1.4368    1118.65    48.17    109.70 
          2010 - 01 - 06    1.4412    1138.50    49.34    111.51 
          2010 - 01 - 07    1.4318    1131.90    49.10    110.82 
          2010 - 01 - 08    1.4412    1136.10    49.84    111.37 
 
 In   [ 7 ] :   data . tail ( )    
 Out [ 7 ] :               AAPL . O    MSFT . O    INTC . O     AMZN . O      GS . N       SPY       . SPX     . VIX    \
          Date 
          2017 - 10 - 25    156.41     78.63     40.78     972.91    241.71    255.29    2557.15    11.23 
          2017 - 10 - 26    157.41     78.76     41.35     972.43    241.72    255.62    2560.40    11.30 
          2017 - 10 - 27    163.05     83.81     44.40    1100.95    241.71    257.71    2581.07     9.80 
          2017 - 10 - 30    166.72     83.89     44.37    1110.85    240.89    256.75    2572.83    10.50 
          2017 - 10 - 31    169.04     83.18     45.49    1105.28    242.48    257.15    2575.26    10.18 
 
                        EUR =       XAU =      GDX       GLD 
          Date 
          2017 - 10 - 25    1.1812    1277.01    22.83    121.35 
          2017 - 10 - 26    1.1650    1266.73    22.43    120.33 
          2017 - 10 - 27    1.1608    1272.60    22.57    120.90 
          2017 - 10 - 30    1.1649    1275.86    22.76    121.13 
          2017 - 10 - 31    1.1644    1271.20    22.48    120.67 
 
 In   [ 8 ] :   data . plot ( figsize = ( 10 ,   12 ) ,   subplots = True )    
          # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_01.png'); 
 
 
 The first five rows … 
 
 … and the final five rows are shown. 
 
 This visualizes the complete data set via multiple subplots. 
 

 
 
 Figure 8-1.  Financial time series data as line plots 
 

 The data used is from the Thomson Reuters (TR) Eikon Data API. In the TR world symbols for financial instruments are called " Reuters Instrument Codes " or  RICs . The financial instruments that the single  RICs  represent are: 

 In   [ 9 ]:   instruments   =   [ 'Apple Stock' ,   'Microsoft Stock' , 
                        'Intel Stock' ,   'Amazon Stock' ,   'Goldman Sachs Stock' , 
                        'SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust' ,   'S&P 500 Index' , 
                        'VIX Volatility Index' ,   'EUR/USD Exchange Rate' , 
                        'Gold Price' ,   'VanEck Vectors Gold Miners ETF' , 
                        'SPDR Gold Trust' ] 

 In   [ 10 ]:   for   pari   in   zip ( data . columns ,   instruments ): 
              print ( '{:8s} | {}' . format ( pari [ 0 ],   pari [ 1 ])) 

          AAPL . O     |   Apple   Stock 
          MSFT . O     |   Microsoft   Stock 
          INTC . O     |   Intel   Stock 
          AMZN . O     |   Amazon   Stock 
          GS . N       |   Goldman   Sachs   Stock 
          SPY        |   SPDR   S & P   500   ETF   Trust 
          . SPX       |   S & P   500   Index 
          . VIX       |   VIX   Volatility   Index 
          EUR =       |   EUR / USD   Exchange   Rate 
          XAU =       |   Gold   Price 
          GDX        |   VanEck   Vectors   Gold   Miners   ETF 
          GLD        |   SPDR   Gold   Trust 
 













 
 Summary Statistics 

 A next step, the financial analyst might take, is to have a look at different summary statistics for the data set to get a " feeling " for what it is all about. 

 In   [ 11 ] :   data . info ( )    
 
           < class   ' pandas . core . frame . DataFrame ' > 
           DatetimeIndex :   1972   entries ,   2010 - 01 - 04   to   2017 - 10 - 31 
           Data   columns   ( total   12   columns ) : 
           AAPL . O      1972   non - null   float64 
           MSFT . O      1972   non - null   float64 
           INTC . O      1972   non - null   float64 
           AMZN . O      1972   non - null   float64 
           GS . N        1972   non - null   float64 
           SPY         1972   non - null   float64 
           . SPX        1972   non - null   float64 
           . VIX        1972   non - null   float64 
           EUR =        1972   non - null   float64 
           XAU =        1972   non - null   float64 
           GDX         1972   non - null   float64 
           GLD         1972   non - null   float64 
           dtypes :   float64 ( 12 ) 
           memory   usage :   200.3   KB 
 
 
 In   [ 12 ] :   data . describe ( ) . round ( 2 )    
 Out [ 12 ] :           AAPL . O     MSFT . O     INTC . O     AMZN . O       GS . N        SPY       . SPX       . VIX    \
           count    1972.00    1972.00    1972.00    1972.00    1972.00    1972.00    1972.00    1972.00 
           mean       86.53      40.59      27.70     401.15     163.61     172.84    1727.54      17.21 
           std        34.04      14.39       5.95     257.12      37.17      42.33     424.35       5.92 
           min        27.44      23.01      17.66     108.61      87.70     102.20    1022.58       9.19 
           25 %        57.57      28.12      22.23     202.66     144.23     132.64    1325.53      13.25 
           50 %        84.63      36.54      26.41     306.42     162.09     178.80    1783.81      15.65 
           75 %       111.87      50.08      33.74     559.45     184.11     208.01    2080.15      19.20 
           max       169.04      83.89      45.49    1110.85     252.89     257.71    2581.07      48.00 
 
                     EUR =       XAU =        GDX        GLD 
           count    1972.00    1972.00    1972.00    1972.00 
           mean        1.25    1352.47      34.50     130.60 
           std         0.12     195.38      15.44      19.46 
           min         1.04    1051.36      12.47     100.50 
           25 %         1.13    1214.56      22.22     116.77 
           50 %         1.29    1288.82      26.59     123.90 
           75 %         1.35    1491.98      49.77     145.43 
           max         1.48    1897.10      66.63     184.59 
 
 
 .info()  gives some meta information about the  DataFrame  object. 
 
 .describe()  provides useful standard statistics per column. 
 
 Tip 
 pandas  provides a number of methods to gain a quick overview over newly imported financial time series data sets, such as  .info()  and  .describe() . They also allow for quick checks whether the importing procedure worked as desired (e.g. whether the  DataFrame  objects indeed has a  DatetimeIndex  as index). 
 

 There are also options, of course, to customize what type of statistic to derive and display. 

 In   [ 13 ] :   data . mean ( )    
 Out [ 13 ] :   AAPL . O        86.530152 
           MSFT . O        40.586752 
           INTC . O        27.701411 
           AMZN . O       401.154006 
           GS . N         163.614625 
           SPY          172.835399 
           . SPX        1727.538342 
           . VIX          17.209498 
           EUR =           1.252613 
           XAU =        1352.471593 
           GDX           34.499391 
           GLD          130.601856 
           dtype :   float64 
 
 In   [ 14 ] :   data . aggregate ( [ min ,    
                           np . mean ,    
                           np . std ,    
                           np . median ,    
                           max ]    
           ) . round ( 2 ) 
 Out [ 14 ] :           AAPL . O    MSFT . O    INTC . O     AMZN . O      GS . N       SPY       . SPX     . VIX    EUR =    \
           min        27.44     23.01     17.66     108.61     87.70    102.20    1022.58     9.19    1.04 
           mean       86.53     40.59     27.70     401.15    163.61    172.84    1727.54    17.21    1.25 
           std        34.04     14.39      5.95     257.12     37.17     42.33     424.35     5.92    0.12 
           median     84.63     36.54     26.41     306.42    162.09    178.80    1783.81    15.65    1.29 
           max       169.04     83.89     45.49    1110.85    252.89    257.71    2581.07    48.00    1.48 
 
                      XAU =      GDX       GLD 
           min       1051.36    12.47    100.50 
           mean      1352.47    34.50    130.60 
           std        195.38    15.44     19.46 
           median    1288.82    26.59    123.90 
           max       1897.10    66.63    184.59 
 
 
 The mean value per column. 
 
 The minimum value per column. 
 
 The mean value per column. 
 
 The standard deviation per column. 
 
 The maximum value per column. 
 
   
 

 Using the  .aggregate()  method also allows to pass custom functions. 
 













 
 Changes over Time 

 Most statistical analyses methods, for example, generally are based on changes of a time series over time and not the absolute values themselves. There are multiple options to calculate the changes of a time series over time, among others: absolute differences, percentage changes and logarithmic (log) returns. 

 First, the absolute differences for which  pandas  provides a special method. 

 In   [ 15 ] :   data . diff ( ) . head ( )    
 Out [ 15 ] :                 AAPL . O    MSFT . O    INTC . O    AMZN . O    GS . N     SPY    . SPX    . VIX      EUR =    \
           Date 
           2010 - 01 - 04         NaN       NaN       NaN       NaN     NaN     NaN     NaN     NaN       NaN 
           2010 - 01 - 05    0.052857     0.010     - 0.01      0.79    3.06    0.30    3.53   - 0.69   - 0.0043 
           2010 - 01 - 06   - 0.487142    - 0.190     - 0.07     - 2.44   - 1.88    0.08    0.62   - 0.19    0.0044 
           2010 - 01 - 07   - 0.055714    - 0.318     - 0.20     - 2.25    3.41    0.48    4.55   - 0.10   - 0.0094 
           2010 - 01 - 08    0.200000     0.208      0.23      3.52   - 3.36    0.38    3.29   - 0.93    0.0094 
 
                        XAU =     GDX     GLD 
           Date 
           2010 - 01 - 04      NaN     NaN     NaN 
           2010 - 01 - 05    - 1.35    0.46   - 0.10 
           2010 - 01 - 06    19.85    1.17    1.81 
           2010 - 01 - 07    - 6.60   - 0.24   - 0.69 
           2010 - 01 - 08     4.20    0.74    0.55 
 
 In   [ 16 ] :   data . diff ( ) . mean ( )    
 Out [ 16 ] :   AAPL . O      0.070252 
           MSFT . O      0.026499 
           INTC . O      0.012486 
           AMZN . O      0.492836 
           GS . N        0.035211 
           SPY         0.072968 
           . SPX        0.731745 
           . VIX       - 0.005003 
           EUR =       - 0.000140 
           XAU =        0.076712 
           GDX        - 0.012801 
           GLD         0.005515 
           dtype :   float64 
 
 
 .diff()  provides the absolute changes between two index values. 
 
 Of course, aggregation operations can be applied in addition. 
 

 From a statistics point of view, absolute changes are not optimal because they are dependent on the scale of the time series data itself. Therefore, percentage changes are usually preferred. The following code derives the percentage changes or percentage returns (also: simple returns) in a financial context and visualizes their mean values per column (see  Figure 8-2 ). 

 In   [ 17 ] :   data . pct_change ( ) . round ( 3 ) . head ( )    
 Out [ 17 ] :               AAPL . O    MSFT . O    INTC . O    AMZN . O     GS . N      SPY     . SPX     . VIX     EUR =    \
           Date 
           2010 - 01 - 04       NaN       NaN       NaN       NaN      NaN      NaN      NaN      NaN      NaN 
           2010 - 01 - 05     0.002     0.000    - 0.000     0.006    0.018    0.003    0.003   - 0.034   - 0.003 
           2010 - 01 - 06    - 0.016    - 0.006    - 0.003    - 0.018   - 0.011    0.001    0.001   - 0.010    0.003 
           2010 - 01 - 07    - 0.002    - 0.010    - 0.010    - 0.017    0.020    0.004    0.004   - 0.005   - 0.007 
           2010 - 01 - 08     0.007     0.007     0.011     0.027   - 0.019    0.003    0.003   - 0.049    0.007 
 
                        XAU =      GDX      GLD 
           Date 
           2010 - 01 - 04      NaN      NaN      NaN 
           2010 - 01 - 05   - 0.001    0.010   - 0.001 
           2010 - 01 - 06    0.018    0.024    0.016 
           2010 - 01 - 07   - 0.006   - 0.005   - 0.006 
           2010 - 01 - 08    0.004    0.015    0.005 
 
 In   [ 18 ] :   data . pct_change ( ) . mean ( ) . plot ( kind = ' bar ' ,   figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_02.png'); 
 
 
 .pct_change()  calculates the percentage change between two index values. 
 
 The mean values of the results visualized as a bar plot. 
 

 
 
 Figure 8-2.  Mean values of percentage changes as bar plot 
 

 As an alternative to percentage returns, log returns can used. In some scenarios, they are more easy to handle and therefore often preferred in a financial context. 2   Figure 8-3  show the cumulative log returns for the single financial times series. This type of plot leads some form of  normalization . 

 In   [ 19 ] :   rets   =   np . log ( data   /   data . shift ( 1 ) )    
 
 In   [ 20 ] :   rets . head ( ) . round ( 3 )    
 Out [ 20 ] :               AAPL . O    MSFT . O    INTC . O    AMZN . O     GS . N      SPY     . SPX     . VIX     EUR =    \
           Date 
           2010 - 01 - 04       NaN       NaN       NaN       NaN      NaN      NaN      NaN      NaN      NaN 
           2010 - 01 - 05     0.002     0.000    - 0.000     0.006    0.018    0.003    0.003   - 0.035   - 0.003 
           2010 - 01 - 06    - 0.016    - 0.006    - 0.003    - 0.018   - 0.011    0.001    0.001   - 0.010    0.003 
           2010 - 01 - 07    - 0.002    - 0.010    - 0.010    - 0.017    0.019    0.004    0.004   - 0.005   - 0.007 
           2010 - 01 - 08     0.007     0.007     0.011     0.027   - 0.019    0.003    0.003   - 0.050    0.007 
 
                        XAU =      GDX      GLD 
           Date 
           2010 - 01 - 04      NaN      NaN      NaN 
           2010 - 01 - 05   - 0.001    0.010   - 0.001 
           2010 - 01 - 06    0.018    0.024    0.016 
           2010 - 01 - 07   - 0.006   - 0.005   - 0.006 
           2010 - 01 - 08    0.004    0.015    0.005 
 
 In   [ 21 ] :   rets . cumsum ( ) . apply ( np . exp ) . plot ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_03.png'); 
 
 
 This calculates the log returns in vectorized fashion. 
 
 A sub-set of the results. 
 
 This plots the cumulative log returns over time; first the  .cumsum()  method is called, then  np.exp()  is applied to the results. 
 

 
 
 Figure 8-3.  Cumulative log returns over time 
 
 













 
 Resampling 

 Resampling is an important operation on financial time series data. Usually, this takes on the form of  up-sampling , meaning that, for example, a time series with daily observations is resampled to a time series with weekly or monthly observations. It might also mean to resample a financial tick data series to one-minute intervals (also: bars). 

 In   [ 22 ] :   data . resample ( ' 1w ' ,   label = ' right ' ) . last ( ) . head ( )    
 Out [ 22 ] :                  AAPL . O    MSFT . O    INTC . O    AMZN . O      GS . N       SPY       . SPX     . VIX    \
           Date 
           2010 - 01 - 10    30.282827     30.66     20.83    133.52    174.31    114.57    1144.98    18.13 
           2010 - 01 - 17    29.418542     30.86     20.80    127.14    165.21    113.64    1136.03    17.91 
           2010 - 01 - 24    28.249972     28.96     19.91    121.43    154.12    109.21    1091.76    27.31 
           2010 - 01 - 31    27.437544     28.18     19.40    125.41    148.72    107.39    1073.87    24.62 
           2010 - 02 - 07    27.922829     28.02     19.47    117.39    154.16    106.66    1066.19    26.11 
 
                         EUR =       XAU =      GDX       GLD 
           Date 
           2010 - 01 - 10    1.4412    1136.10    49.84    111.37 
           2010 - 01 - 17    1.4382    1129.90    47.42    110.86 
           2010 - 01 - 24    1.4137    1092.60    43.79    107.17 
           2010 - 01 - 31    1.3862    1081.05    40.72    105.96 
           2010 - 02 - 07    1.3662    1064.95    42.41    104.68 
 
 In   [ 23 ] :   data . resample ( ' 1m ' ,   label = ' right ' ) . last ( ) . head ( )    
 Out [ 23 ] :                  AAPL . O     MSFT . O    INTC . O    AMZN . O      GS . N         SPY       . SPX    \
           Date 
           2010 - 01 - 31    27.437544    28.1800     19.40    125.41    148.72    107.3900    1073.87 
           2010 - 02 - 28    29.231399    28.6700     20.53    118.40    156.35    110.7400    1104.49 
           2010 - 03 - 31    33.571395    29.2875     22.29    135.77    170.63    117.0000    1169.43 
           2010 - 04 - 30    37.298534    30.5350     22.84    137.10    145.20    118.8125    1186.69 
           2010 - 05 - 31    36.697106    25.8000     21.42    125.46    144.26    109.3690    1089.41 
 
                        . VIX      EUR =       XAU =      GDX        GLD 
           Date 
           2010 - 01 - 31    24.62    1.3862    1081.05    40.72    105.960 
           2010 - 02 - 28    19.50    1.3625    1116.10    43.89    109.430 
           2010 - 03 - 31    17.59    1.3510    1112.80    44.41    108.950 
           2010 - 04 - 30    22.05    1.3295    1178.25    50.51    115.360 
           2010 - 05 - 31    32.07    1.2267    1213.81    49.86    118.881 
 
 In   [ 24 ] :   rets . cumsum ( ) . resample ( ' 1m ' ,   label = ' right ' ) . last ( 
                                     ) . plot ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_04.png'); 
 
 
 EOD data gets resampled to 
 
 A sub-set of the results. 
 
 This plots the cumulative log returns over time; first the  .cumsum()  method is called, then  np.exp()  is applied to the results. 
 

 
 
 Figure 8-4.  Resampled cumulative log returns over time (monthly) 
 
 Caution 
 When resampling,  pandas  takes by default the left label (or index value) of the interval. To be financially consistent, make sure to use the right label (index value) and in general the last available data point in the interval. Otherwise, a foresight bias might sneak into the financial analysis. 3 
 
 





 













 
 Rolling Statistics 

 It is financial tradition, to work with  rolling statistics , often also called  financial indicators  or  financial studies . Such rolling statistics are basic tools for financial chartists and technical traders, for example. This section works with a single financial time series only. 

 In   [ 25 ]:   sym   =   'AAPL.O' 

 In   [ 26 ]:   data   =   pd . DataFrame ( data [ sym ]) 

 In   [ 27 ]:   data . tail () 
 Out [ 27 ]:               AAPL . O 
          Date 
          2017 - 10 - 25    156.41 
          2017 - 10 - 26    157.41 
          2017 - 10 - 27    163.05 
          2017 - 10 - 30    166.72 
          2017 - 10 - 31    169.04 








 
 An Overview 

 It is straightforward to derive standard rolling statistics with  pandas . 

 In   [ 28 ] :   window   =   20    
 
 In   [ 29 ] :   data [ ' min ' ]   =   data [ sym ] . rolling ( window = window ) . min ( )    
 
 In   [ 30 ] :   data [ ' mean ' ]   =   data [ sym ] . rolling ( window = window ) . mean ( )    
 
 In   [ 31 ] :   data [ ' std ' ]   =   data [ sym ] . rolling ( window = window ) . std ( )    
 
 In   [ 32 ] :   data [ ' median ' ]   =   data [ sym ] . rolling ( window = window ) . median ( )    
 
 In   [ 33 ] :   data [ ' max ' ]   =   data [ sym ] . rolling ( window = window ) . max ( )    
 
 In   [ 34 ] :   data [ ' ewma ' ]   =   data [ sym ] . ewm ( halflife = 0.5 ,   min_periods = window ) . mean ( )    
 
 
 Defines the window, i.e. the number of index values to include. 
 
 Calculates the rolling minimum value. 
 
 Calculates the rolling mean value. 
 
 Calculates the rolling standard deviation. 
 
 Calculates the rolling median value. 
 
 Calculates the rolling maximum value. 
 
 This calculates the exponentially weighted moving average, with decay in terms of a half life of  0.5 . 
 

 To derive more specialized financial indicators, additional packages are generally needed (see, for instance, the financial plots with  Cufflinks  in  “Interactive 2D Plotting” .) Custom ones can also easily be applied via the  .apply()  method. 

 The following code shows a sub-set of the results and visualizes a selection of the calculated rolling statistics (see  Figure 8-5 ). 

 In   [ 35 ] :   data . dropna ( ) . head ( ) 
 Out [ 35 ] :                  AAPL . O          min         mean         std       median          max    \
           Date 
           2010 - 02 - 01    27.818544    27.437544    29.580892    0.933650    29.821542    30.719969 
           2010 - 02 - 02    27.979972    27.437544    29.451249    0.968048    29.711113    30.719969 
           2010 - 02 - 03    28.461400    27.437544    29.343035    0.950665    29.685970    30.719969 
           2010 - 02 - 04    27.435687    27.435687    29.207892    1.021129    29.547113    30.719969 
           2010 - 02 - 05    27.922829    27.435687    29.099892    1.037811    29.419256    30.719969 
 
                            ewma 
           Date 
           2010 - 02 - 01    27.805432 
           2010 - 02 - 02    27.936337 
           2010 - 02 - 03    28.330134 
           2010 - 02 - 04    27.659299 
           2010 - 02 - 05    27.856947 
 
 In   [ 36 ] :   ax   =   data [ [ ' min ' ,   ' mean ' ,   ' max ' ] ] . iloc [ - 200 : ] . plot ( 
               figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ,   style = [ ' g-- ' ,   ' r-- ' ,   ' g-- ' ] ,   lw = 0.8 )    
           data [ sym ] . iloc [ - 200 : ] . plot ( ax = ax ,   lw = 2.0 ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_05.png'); 
 
 
 Plots three rolling statistics for the final 200 data rows. 
 
 Add the original time series data to the plot. 
 

 
 
 Figure 8-5.  Rolling statistics for minimum, mean, maximum values 
 
 













 
 A Technical Analysis Example 

 Rolling statistics are a major tool in the so-called technical analysis of stocks as compared to the fundamental analysis which focuses, for instance, on financial reports and the strategic positions of the company whose stock is analyzed. 

 A decades-old trading strategy based on technical analysis is based on  two simple moving averages (SMAs) . The idea is that the trader should be long a stock (or financial instrument in general) when the shorter-term SMA is above the longer-term SMA and should be short the stock when the opposite holds true. The concepts can be made precise with  pandas  and the capabilities of the  DataFrame  object. 

 Rolling statistics are generally only calculated when there is enough data given the  window  parameter specification. As  Figure 8-6  shows, the SMA time series only start at the day for which there is enough data given the specific parametrization. 

 In   [ 37 ] :   data [ ' SMA1 ' ]   =   data [ sym ] . rolling ( window = 42 ) . mean ( )    
 
 In   [ 38 ] :   data [ ' SMA2 ' ]   =   data [ sym ] . rolling ( window = 252 ) . mean ( )    
 
 In   [ 39 ] :   data [ [ sym ,   ' SMA1 ' ,   ' SMA2 ' ] ] . tail ( ) 
 Out [ 39 ] :               AAPL . O          SMA1          SMA2 
           Date 
           2017 - 10 - 25    156.41    157.610952    139.862520 
           2017 - 10 - 26    157.41    157.514286    140.028472 
           2017 - 10 - 27    163.05    157.517619    140.221210 
           2017 - 10 - 30    166.72    157.597857    140.431528 
           2017 - 10 - 31    169.04    157.717857    140.651766 
 
 In   [ 40 ] :   data [ [ sym ,   ' SMA1 ' ,   ' SMA2 ' ] ] . plot ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_06.png'); 
 
 
 Calculates the values for the shorter-term SMA. 
 
 Calculates the values for the longer-term SMA. 
 
 Visualizes the stock price data plus the two SMA time series. 
 

 
 
 Figure 8-6.  Apple stock price and two simple moving averages 
 

 In this context, the SMAs are only a means to an end. They are used to derive positionings to implement a trading strategy.  Figure 8-7  visualizes a long position by a value of  1  and a short position by a value of  -1 . The change in the position is triggered (visually) by a crossover of the two lines representing the SMA time series. 

 In   [ 41 ] :   data . dropna ( inplace = True )    
 
 In   [ 42 ] :   data [ ' positions ' ]   =   np . where ( data [ ' SMA1 ' ]   >   data [ ' SMA2 ' ] ,    
                                        1 ,    
                                        - 1 )    
 
 In   [ 43 ] :   ax   =   data [ [ sym ,   ' SMA1 ' ,   ' SMA2 ' ,   ' positions ' ] ] . plot ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) , 
                                                         secondary_y = ' positions ' ) 
           ax . get_legend ( ) . set_bbox_to_anchor ( ( 0.25 ,   0.85 ) ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_07.png'); 
 
 
 Only complete data rows are kept. 
 
 If the shorter-term SMA value is greater than the longer-term one … 
 
 … go long the stock (put a  1 ) … 
 
 … otherwise go short the stock (put a  -1 ). 
 

 
 
 Figure 8-7.  Apple stock price, two simple moving averages and positioning 
 

 The trading strategy implicitly derived here only leads to a few trades per se: only when the position value changes (i.e. a crossover happens), a trade takes place. Including opening and closing trades, this would add up to six trades only in total. 
 





 













 
 Correlation Analysis 

 As a further illustration of how to work with  pandas  and financial time series data, consider the case of the S&P 500 stock index and the VIX volatility index. It is a stylized fact, that when the S&P 500 rises, the VIX falls in general — and vice versa. This is about  correlation  and not  causation . This section shows how to come up supporting statistical evidence for the stylized fact that the S&P 500 and the VIX are (highly) negatively correlated. 4 








 
 The Data 

 The data set now consists of two financial times series, both visualized in  Figure 8-8 . 

 In   [ 44 ]:   # EOD data from Thomson Reuters Eikon Data API 
          raw   =   pd . read_csv ( '../../source/tr_eikon_eod_data.csv' , 
                           index_col = 0 ,   parse_dates = True ) 

 In   [ 45 ]:   data   =   raw [[ '.SPX' ,   '.VIX' ]] 

 In   [ 46 ]:   data . tail () 
 Out [ 46 ]:                  . SPX     . VIX 
          Date 
          2017 - 10 - 25    2557.15    11.23 
          2017 - 10 - 26    2560.40    11.30 
          2017 - 10 - 27    2581.07     9.80 
          2017 - 10 - 30    2572.83    10.50 
          2017 - 10 - 31    2575.26    10.18 

 In   [ 47 ]:   data . plot ( subplots = True ,   figsize = ( 10 ,   6 )); 
          # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_08.png'); 

 
 
 Figure 8-8.  S&P 500 and VIX time series data (different scaling) 
 

 When plotting (parts of) the two time series in a single plot and with adjusted scalings, the stylized fact of negative correlation between the two indices becomes already evident through simple visual inspection. 

 In   [ 48 ]:   data . loc [: '2012-12-31' ] . plot ( secondary_y = '.VIX' ,   figsize = ( 10 ,   6 )); 
          # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_09.png'); 

 
 
 Figure 8-9.  S&P 500 and VIX time series data (same scaling) 
 
 













 
 Logarithmic Returns 

 As pointed out above, statistical analysis in general relies on returns instead of absolute changes or even absolute values. Therefore, the calculation of log returns first before any further analysis takes place.  Figure 8-10  shows the high variability of the log returns over time. For both indices so-called volatility clusters can be spotted. And in general, periods of high volatility in the stock index are accompanied by the same phenomenon in the volatility index. 

 In   [ 49 ]:   rets   =   np . log ( data   /   data . shift ( 1 )) 

 In   [ 50 ]:   rets . head () 
 Out [ 50 ]:                   . SPX        . VIX 
          Date 
          2010 - 01 - 04         NaN         NaN 
          2010 - 01 - 05    0.003111   - 0.035038 
          2010 - 01 - 06    0.000545   - 0.009868 
          2010 - 01 - 07    0.003993   - 0.005233 
          2010 - 01 - 08    0.002878   - 0.050024 

 In   [ 51 ]:   rets . dropna ( inplace = True ) 

 In   [ 52 ]:   rets . plot ( subplots = True ,   figsize = ( 10 ,   6 )); 
          # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_10.png'); 

 
 
 Figure 8-10.  Log returns of the S&P 500 and VIX over time 
 

 In such a context, the  pandas   scatter_matrix()  plotting function comes in handy for visualizations. It plots the log returns of the two series against each other and one can add either histogram or a kernel density estimator (KDE) on the diagonal (see  Figure 8-11 ). 

 In   [ 53 ] :   pd . plotting . scatter_matrix ( rets ,    
                                      alpha = 0.2 ,    
                                      diagonal = ' hist ' ,    
                                      hist_kwds = { ' bins ' :   35 } ,    
                                      figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_11.png'); 
 
 
 The data set to be plotted. 
 
 The  alpha  parameter for the opacity of the dots. 
 
 What to place on the diagonal; here: histogram of the column data. 
 
 These are keywords to be passed to the histogram plotting function. 
 

 
 
 Figure 8-11.  Log returns of the S&P 500 and VIX as a scatter matrix 
 
 













 
 OLS Regression 

 With all these preparations, an ordinary least-squares (OLS) regression analysis is convenient to implement.  Figure 8-12  shows a scatter plot of the log returns and the linear regression line through the cloud of dots. The slope is obviously negative providing support for the stylized fact about the negative correlation between the two indices. 

 In   [ 54 ] :   reg   =   np . polyfit ( rets [ ' .SPX ' ] ,   rets [ ' .VIX ' ] ,   deg = 1 )    
 
 In   [ 55 ] :   ax   =   rets . plot ( kind = ' scatter ' ,   x = ' .SPX ' ,   y = ' .VIX ' ,   figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) )    
           ax . plot ( rets [ ' .SPX ' ] ,   np . polyval ( reg ,   rets [ ' .SPX ' ] ) ,   ' r ' ,   lw = 2 ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_12.png'); 
 
 
 This implements a linear OLS regression. 
 
 This plots the log returns as a scatter plot … 
 
 … to which the linear regression line is added. 
 

 
 
 Figure 8-12.  Log returns of the S&P 500 and VIX as a scatter matrix 
 
 













 
 Correlation 

 Finally, consider correlation measures directly. Two such measures are considered, a static one taking into account the complete data set and a rolling one showing the correlation for a fixed window over time.  Figure 8-13  illustrates that the correlation indeed varies over time but that it is always, given the parametrization, negative. This provides indeed strong support for the stylized fact that the S&P 500 and the VIX indices are — even strongly — negatively correlated. 

 In   [ 56 ] :   rets . corr ( )    
 Out [ 56 ] :             . SPX        . VIX 
           . SPX    1.000000   - 0.808372 
           . VIX   - 0.808372    1.000000 
 
 In   [ 57 ] :   ax   =   rets [ ' .SPX ' ] . rolling ( window = 252 ) . corr ( 
                             rets [ ' .VIX ' ] ) . plot ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) )    
           ax . axhline ( rets . corr ( ) . iloc [ 0 ,   1 ] ,   c = ' r ' ) ;    
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_13.png'); 
 
 
 The correlation matrix for the whole  DataFrame . 
 
 This plots the rolling correlation over time … 
 
 … and adds the static value to the plot as horizontal line. 
 

 
 
 Figure 8-13.  Correlation between S&P 500 and VIX (static and rolling) 
 
 





 













 
 High Frequency Data 

 This chapter is about financial time series analysis with  pandas . A special case of a financial time series are tick data sets. Frankly, they can be handled more or less in the same ways as, for instance, the EOD data set used throughout this chapter so far. Importing such data sets also is quite fast in general with  pandas . The data set used comprises 17,352 data rows (see also  Figure 8-14 ). 

 In   [ 58 ] :   % % time 
           # data from FXCM Forex Capital Markets Ltd. 
           tick   =   pd . read_csv ( ' ../../source/fxcm_eur_usd_tick_data.csv ' , 
                                index_col = 0 ,   parse_dates = True ) 
 
           CPU   times :   user   23   ms ,   sys :   3.35   ms ,   total :   26.4   ms 
           Wall   time :   25.1   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 59 ] :   tick . info ( ) 
 
           < class   ' pandas . core . frame . DataFrame ' > 
           DatetimeIndex :   17352   entries ,   2017 - 11 - 10   12 : 00 : 00.007000   to   2017 - 11 - 10   14 : 00 : 00.131000 
           Data   columns   ( total   2   columns ) : 
           Bid      17352   non - null   float64 
           Ask      17352   non - null   float64 
           dtypes :   float64 ( 2 ) 
           memory   usage :   406.7   KB 
 
 
 In   [ 60 ] :   tick [ ' Mid ' ]   =   tick . mean ( axis = 1 )    
 
 In   [ 61 ] :   tick [ ' Mid ' ] . plot ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) ; 
           # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_14.png'); 
 
 
 Calculates the  Mid  price for every data row. 
 

 
 
 Figure 8-14.  Tick data for EUR/USD exchange rate 
 

 Working with tick data is generally as scenario where resampling of financial time series data is needed. The code that follows resamples the tick data to one minute bar data. Such a data set (see also  Figure 8-15 ) is then used, for example, to backtest algorithmic trading strategies or to implement a technical analysis. 

 In   [ 62 ]:   tick_resam   =   tick . resample ( rule = '1min' ,   label = 'right' ) . last () 

 In   [ 63 ]:   tick_resam . head () 
 Out [ 63 ]:                            Bid        Ask         Mid 
          2017 - 11 - 10   12 : 01 : 00    1.16406    1.16407    1.164065 
          2017 - 11 - 10   12 : 02 : 00    1.16396    1.16397    1.163965 
          2017 - 11 - 10   12 : 03 : 00    1.16416    1.16418    1.164170 
          2017 - 11 - 10   12 : 04 : 00    1.16417    1.16417    1.164170 
          2017 - 11 - 10   12 : 05 : 00    1.16425    1.16427    1.164260 

 In   [ 64 ]:   tick_resam [ 'Mid' ] . plot ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 )); 
          # plt.savefig('../../images/ch08/fts_15.png'); 

 
 
 Figure 8-15.  One minute bar data for EUR/USD exchange rate 
 
 













 
 Conclusions 

 This chapter deals with financial time series, probably the most importat data type in the financial field.  pandas  is a powerful package to deal with such data sets, allowing not only for efficient data analyses but also easy visualizations, for instance.  pandas  is also helpful in reading such data sets from different sources as well as in exporting such data sets to different technical file formats. This is illustrated in the subsequent chapter  Chapter 9 . 
 













 
 Further Reading 

 Good references in book form for the topics covered in this chapter are: 

 
 
 McKinney, Wes (2017):  Python for Data Analysis . 2nd ed., O’Reilly, Beijing et al. 
 
 
 VanderPlas, Jake (2016):  Python Data Science Handbook . O’Reilly, Beijing et al. 
 
 
 







 1  The file contains end-of-day (EOD) data for different financial instruments as retrieved from the Thomson Reuters Eikon Data API. 2  One of the advantages is additivity over time which does not hold true for simple percentage changes/returns. 3   Foresight bias  — or, in its stongest form,  perfect foresight  — means that at some point in the financial analysis, data is used that only becomes availble at a later point. The result might be " too good " results, for example, when backtesting a trading strategy. 4  One reasoning behind this is that when the stock index comes down — during a crisis, for instance — trading volume goes up and therewith also the volatility. When the stock index is on the rise, investors generally are calm and do not see much incentive to engage in heavy trading. In particular, long-only investors then try to ride the trend even further. 
 
 



 
 
   
   
 Chapter 9.  Input/Output Operations 

 
 It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data. 
 Sherlock Holmes 
 

 As a general rule, the majority of data, be it in a finance context or any other application area, is stored on hard disk drives (HDDs) or some other form of permanent storage device, like solid state disks (SSDs) or hybrid disk drives. Storage capacities have been steadily increasing over the years, while costs per storage unit (e.g., per megabyte) have been steadily falling. 

 At the same time, stored data volumes have been increasing at a much faster pace than the typical random access memory (RAM) available even in the largest machines. This makes it necessary not only to store data to disk for permanent storage, but also to compensate for lack of sufficient RAM by swapping data from RAM to disk and back. 

 Input/output (I/O) operations are therefore in general important tasks when it comes to finance applications and data-intensive applications in general. Often they represent the bottleneck for performance-critical computations, since I/O operations cannot in general shuffle data fast enough to the RAM 1  and from the RAM to the disk. In a sense, CPUs are often " starving " due to slow I/O operations. 

 Although the majority of today’s financial and corporate analytics efforts are confronted with big data (e.g., of petascale size), single analytics tasks generally use data sub-sets that fall in the mid data category. A study by Microsoft Research concludes: 
 
 Our measurements as well as other recent work shows that the majority of real-world analytic jobs process less than 100 GB of input, but popular infrastructures such as Hadoop/MapReduce were originally designed for petascale processing. 
 Appuswamy et al. (2013) 
 

 In terms of frequency, single financial analytics tasks generally process data of not more than a couple of gigabytes (GB) in size—and this is a sweet spot for Python and the libraries of its scientific stack, such as  NumPy ,  pandas , and  PyTables . Data sets of such a size can also be analyzed in-memory, leading to generally high speeds with today’s CPUs and GPUs. However, the data has to be read into RAM and the results have to be written to disk, meanwhile ensuring that today’s performance requirements are met. 

 This chapter addresses the following topics: 
 
 “Basic I/O with Python” 
 
 Python has built-in functions to serialize and store any object on disk and to read it from disk into RAM; apart from that, Python is strong when it comes to working with text files and  SQL  databases.  NumPy  also provides dedicated functions for fast binary storage and retrieval of  ndarray  objects. 
 
 “I/O with pandas” 
 
 The  pandas  library provides a plentitude of convenience functions and methods to read data stored in different formats (e.g.,  CSV ,  JSON ) and to write data to files in diverse formats. 
 
 “Fast I/O with PyTables” 
 
 PyTables  uses the  HDF5  standard with hierarchical database structure and binary storage to accomplish fast I/O operations for large data sets; speed often is only bound by the hardware used. 
 
 “I/O with TsTables” 
 
 TsTables  is a package that builds on top of  PyTables  and allows for fast storage and retrieval of time series data. 
 
 






 
 Basic I/O with Python 

 Python itself comes with a multitude of I/O capabilities, some optimized for performance, others more for flexibility. In general, however, they are easily used in interactive as well as in production settings. 








 
 Writing Objects to Disk 

 For later use, for documentation, or for sharing with others, one might want to store Python objects on disk. One option is to use the  pickle  module. This module can serialize the majority of Python objects.  Serialization  refers to the conversion of an object (hierarchy) to a byte stream;  deserialization  is the opposite operation. 

 As usual, some imports and customizations with regard to plotting first: 

 In   [ 1 ]:   from   pylab   import   plt ,   mpl 
         plt . style . use ( 'seaborn' ) 
         mpl . rcParams [ 'font.family' ]   =   'serif' 
         % matplotlib   inline 

 The example that follows works with (pseudo)random data, this time stored in a  list  object: 

 In   [ 2 ] :   import   pickle    
          import   numpy   as   np 
          from   random   import   gauss    
 
 In   [ 3 ] :   a   =   [ gauss ( 1.5 ,   2 )   for   i   in   range ( 1000000 ) ]    
 
 In   [ 4 ] :   path   =   ' /Users/yves/Documents/Temp/data/ '    
 
 In   [ 5 ] :   pkl_file   =   open ( path   +   ' data.pkl ' ,   ' wb ' )    
 
 
 Imports the  pickle  module from the standard library. 
 
 Import  gauss  to generate normally distributed random numbers. 
 
 Creates a larger  list  object with random numbers. 
 
 Specifies the path where to store the data files. 
 
 Opens a file for writing in binary mode ( wb ). 
 

 The two major functions to serialize and deserialize Python objects are  pickle.dump() , for writing objects, and  pickle.load() , for loading them into the memory: 

 In   [ 6 ] :   % time   pickle . dump ( a ,   pkl_file )    
 
          CPU   times :   user   23.4   ms ,   sys :   10.1   ms ,   total :   33.5   ms 
          Wall   time :   31.9   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 7 ] :   pkl_file . close ( )    
 
 In   [ 8 ] :   ll   $ path *    
 
          - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff      9002006   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / data . pkl 
          - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    163328824   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / tstb . h5 
 
 
 In   [ 9 ] :   pkl_file   =   open ( path   +   ' data.pkl ' ,   ' rb ' )    
 
 In   [ 10 ] :   % time   b   =   pickle . load ( pkl_file )    
 
           CPU   times :   user   28.7   ms ,   sys :   15.2   ms ,   total :   43.9   ms 
           Wall   time :   41.9   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 11 ] :   a [ : 3 ] 
 Out [ 11 ] :   [ 3.0804166128701134 ,   - 0.6586387748854099 ,   3.3266248354210206 ] 
 
 In   [ 12 ] :   b [ : 3 ] 
 Out [ 12 ] :   [ 3.0804166128701134 ,   - 0.6586387748854099 ,   3.3266248354210206 ] 
 
 In   [ 13 ] :   np . allclose ( np . array ( a ) ,   np . array ( b ) )    
 Out [ 13 ] :   True 
 
 
 Serializes the object  a  and saves it to the file. 
 
 Closes the file. 
 
 Shows the file on disk and its size (Mac/Linux). 
 
 Opens the file for reading in binary mode ( rb ). 
 
 Reads the objects from disk and deserializes it. 
 
 Converting  a  and  b  to  ndarrary  objects,  np.allclose()  verifies that both contain the same data (numbers). 
 

 Storing and retrieving a single object with  pickle  obviously is quite simple. What about two objects? 

 In   [ 14 ] :   pkl_file   =   open ( path   +   ' data.pkl ' ,   ' wb ' ) 
 
 In   [ 15 ] :   % time   pickle . dump ( np . array ( a ) ,   pkl_file )    
 
           CPU   times :   user   26.6   ms ,   sys :   11.5   ms ,   total :   38.1   ms 
           Wall   time :   36.3   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 16 ] :   % time   pickle . dump ( np . array ( a )   * *   2 ,   pkl_file )    
 
           CPU   times :   user   35.3   ms ,   sys :   12.7   ms ,   total :   48   ms 
           Wall   time :   46.8   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 17 ] :   pkl_file . close ( ) 
 
 In   [ 18 ] :   ll   $ path *    
 
           - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff     16000322   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / data . pkl 
           - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    163328824   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / tstb . h5 
 
 
 Serializes the  ndarray  version of  a  and saves it. 
 
 Serializes the squared  ndarray  version of  a  and saves it. 
 
 The file now has roughly double the size from before. 
 

 What about reading the two  ndarray  objects back into memory? 

 In   [ 19 ] :   pkl_file   =   open ( path   +   ' data.pkl ' ,   ' rb ' ) 
 
 In   [ 20 ] :   x   =   pickle . load ( pkl_file )    
           x [ : 4 ] 
 Out [ 20 ] :   array ( [   3.08041661 ,   - 0.65863877 ,    3.32662484 ,    0.77225328 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 21 ] :   y   =   pickle . load ( pkl_file )    
           y [ : 4 ] 
 Out [ 21 ] :   array ( [    9.48896651 ,     0.43380504 ,    11.0664328   ,     0.59637513 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 22 ] :   pkl_file . close ( ) 
 
 
 This retrieves the object that was stored  first . 
 
 This retrieves the object that was stored  second . 
 

 Obviously,  pickle  stores objects according to the  first in, first out  (FIFO) principle. There is one major problem with this: there is no meta-information available to the user to know beforehand what is stored in a  pickle  file. 

 A sometimes helpful workaround is to not store single objects, but a  dict  object containing all the other objects: 

 In   [ 23 ] :   pkl_file   =   open ( path   +   ' data.pkl ' ,   ' wb ' ) 
           pickle . dump ( { ' x ' :   x ,   ' y ' :   y } ,   pkl_file )    
           pkl_file . close ( ) 
 
 In   [ 24 ] :   pkl_file   =   open ( path   +   ' data.pkl ' ,   ' rb ' ) 
           data   =   pickle . load ( pkl_file )    
           pkl_file . close ( ) 
           for   key   in   data . keys ( ) : 
               print ( key ,   data [ key ] [ : 4 ] ) 
 
           x   [   3.08041661   - 0.65863877    3.32662484    0.77225328 ] 
           y   [    9.48896651     0.43380504    11.0664328      0.59637513 ] 
 
 
 In   [ 25 ] :   ! rm   - f   $ path * 
 
 
 Stores a  dict  object containing the two  ndarray  objects. 
 
 Retrieves the  dict  objects. 
 

 This approach, however, requires to write and read all objects at once. This is a compromise one can probably live with in many circumstances given the higher convenience it brings along. 
 













 
 Reading and Writing Text Files 

 Text processing can be considered a strength of Python. In fact, many corporate and scientific users use Python for exactly this task. With Python you have a multitude of options to work with  str  objects, as well as with text files in general. 

 Assume the case of quite a large set of data that that shall be shared as a Comma Separated Value ( CSV ) file. Although such files have a special internal structure, they are basically plain text files. The following code creates a dummy data set as an  ndarray  object, a  DatetimeIndex  object, combines the two and stores the data as a CSV text file. 

 In   [ 26 ] :   import   pandas   as   pd 
 
 In   [ 27 ] :   rows   =   5000    
           a   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( rows ,   5 ) ) . round ( 4 )    
 
 In   [ 28 ] :   a    
 Out [ 28 ] :   array ( [ [ - 0.9627 ,    0.1326 ,   - 2.012   ,   - 0.299   ,   - 1.4554 ] , 
                  [   0.8918 ,    0.8904 ,   - 0.3396 ,   - 2.3485 ,    2.0913 ] , 
                  [ - 0.1899 ,   - 0.9574 ,    1.0258 ,    0.6206 ,   - 2.4693 ] , 
                  . . . , 
                  [   1.4688 ,   - 1.268   ,   - 0.4778 ,    1.4315 ,   - 1.4689 ] , 
                  [   1.1162 ,    0.152   ,   - 0.9363 ,   - 0.7869 ,   - 0.1147 ] , 
                  [ - 0.699   ,    0.3206 ,    0.3659 ,   - 1.0282 ,   - 0.4151 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 29 ] :   t   =   pd . date_range ( start = ' 2019/1/1 ' ,   periods = rows ,   freq = ' H ' )    
 
 In   [ 30 ] :   t    
 Out [ 30 ] :   DatetimeIndex ( [ ' 2019-01-01 00:00:00 ' ,   ' 2019-01-01 01:00:00 ' , 
                          ' 2019-01-01 02:00:00 ' ,   ' 2019-01-01 03:00:00 ' , 
                          ' 2019-01-01 04:00:00 ' ,   ' 2019-01-01 05:00:00 ' , 
                          ' 2019-01-01 06:00:00 ' ,   ' 2019-01-01 07:00:00 ' , 
                          ' 2019-01-01 08:00:00 ' ,   ' 2019-01-01 09:00:00 ' , 
                          . . . 
                          ' 2019-07-27 22:00:00 ' ,   ' 2019-07-27 23:00:00 ' , 
                          ' 2019-07-28 00:00:00 ' ,   ' 2019-07-28 01:00:00 ' , 
                          ' 2019-07-28 02:00:00 ' ,   ' 2019-07-28 03:00:00 ' , 
                          ' 2019-07-28 04:00:00 ' ,   ' 2019-07-28 05:00:00 ' , 
                          ' 2019-07-28 06:00:00 ' ,   ' 2019-07-28 07:00:00 ' ] , 
                         dtype = ' datetime64[ns] ' ,   length = 5000 ,   freq = ' H ' ) 
 
 In   [ 31 ] :   csv_file   =   open ( path   +   ' data.csv ' ,   ' w ' )    
 
 In   [ 32 ] :   header   =   ' date,no1,no2,no3,no4,no5 \n '    
 
 In   [ 33 ] :   csv_file . write ( header )    
 Out [ 33 ] :   25 
 
 In   [ 34 ] :   for   t_ ,   ( no1 ,   no2 ,   no3 ,   no4 ,   no5 )   in   zip ( t ,   a ) :    
               s   =   ' {},{},{},{},{},{} \n ' . format ( t_ ,   no1 ,   no2 ,   no3 ,   no4 ,   no5 )    
               csv_file . write ( s )    
 
 In   [ 35 ] :   csv_file . close ( ) 
 
 In   [ 36 ] :   ll   $ path * 
 
           - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    284621   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / data . csv 
 
 
 Defines the number of rows for the data set. 
 
 Creates the  ndarray  object with the random numbers. 
 
 Creates a  DatetimeIndex  object of appropriate length (hourly intervals). 
 
 Opens a file for writing ( w ). 
 
 Defines the header row (column labels) and writes it as the first line. 
 
 The data is combined row-wise … 
 
 … into a  str  objects … 
 
 … and written line-by-line (appended to the CSV text file). 
 

 The other way around works quite similarly. First, open the now-existing  CSV  file. Second, read its content line by line using the  .readline()  or  .readlines()  methods of the  file  object: 

 In   [ 37 ] :   csv_file   =   open ( path   +   ' data.csv ' ,   ' r ' )    
 
 In   [ 38 ] :   for   i   in   range ( 5 ) : 
               print ( csv_file . readline ( ) ,   end = ' ' )    
 
           date , no1 , no2 , no3 , no4 , no5 
           2019 - 01 - 01   00 : 00 : 00 , - 0.9627 , 0.1326 , - 2.012 , - 0.299 , - 1.4554 
           2019 - 01 - 01   01 : 00 : 00 , 0.8918 , 0.8904 , - 0.3396 , - 2.3485 , 2.0913 
           2019 - 01 - 01   02 : 00 : 00 , - 0.1899 , - 0.9574 , 1.0258 , 0.6206 , - 2.4693 
           2019 - 01 - 01   03 : 00 : 00 , - 0.0217 , - 0.7168 , 1.7875 , 1.6226 , - 0.4857 
 
 
 In   [ 39 ] :   csv_file . close ( ) 
 
 In   [ 40 ] :   csv_file   =   open ( path   +   ' data.csv ' ,   ' r ' )    
 
 In   [ 41 ] :   content   =   csv_file . readlines ( )    
 
 In   [ 42 ] :   content [ : 5 ]    
 Out [ 42 ] :   [ ' date,no1,no2,no3,no4,no5 \n ' , 
            ' 2019-01-01 00:00:00,-0.9627,0.1326,-2.012,-0.299,-1.4554 \n ' , 
            ' 2019-01-01 01:00:00,0.8918,0.8904,-0.3396,-2.3485,2.0913 \n ' , 
            ' 2019-01-01 02:00:00,-0.1899,-0.9574,1.0258,0.6206,-2.4693 \n ' , 
            ' 2019-01-01 03:00:00,-0.0217,-0.7168,1.7875,1.6226,-0.4857 \n ' ] 
 
 In   [ 43 ] :   csv_file . close ( ) 
 
 
 Opens the file for reading ( r ). 
 
 Reads the file contents line-by-line and prints it. 
 
 Reads the file contents in a single step … 
 
 … the result of which is a  list  object with all lines as separate  str  objects. 
 

 CSV  files are so important and commonplace that there is a  csv  module in the Python standard library that simplifies the processing of CSV files. Two helpful reader (iterator) objects of the  csv  module either return a  list  object of  list  objects or a  list  object of  dict  objects. 

 In   [ 44 ] :   import   csv 
 
 In   [ 45 ] :   with   open ( path   +   ' data.csv ' ,   ' r ' )   as   f : 
               csv_reader   =   csv . reader ( f )    
               lines   =   [ line   for   line   in   csv_reader ] 
 
 In   [ 46 ] :   lines [ : 5 ]    
 Out [ 46 ] :   [ [ ' date ' ,   ' no1 ' ,   ' no2 ' ,   ' no3 ' ,   ' no4 ' ,   ' no5 ' ] , 
            [ ' 2019-01-01 00:00:00 ' ,   ' -0.9627 ' ,   ' 0.1326 ' ,   ' -2.012 ' ,   ' -0.299 ' ,   ' -1.4554 ' ] , 
            [ ' 2019-01-01 01:00:00 ' ,   ' 0.8918 ' ,   ' 0.8904 ' ,   ' -0.3396 ' ,   ' -2.3485 ' ,   ' 2.0913 ' ] , 
            [ ' 2019-01-01 02:00:00 ' ,   ' -0.1899 ' ,   ' -0.9574 ' ,   ' 1.0258 ' ,   ' 0.6206 ' ,   ' -2.4693 ' ] , 
            [ ' 2019-01-01 03:00:00 ' ,   ' -0.0217 ' ,   ' -0.7168 ' ,   ' 1.7875 ' ,   ' 1.6226 ' ,   ' -0.4857 ' ] ] 
 
 In   [ 47 ] :   with   open ( path   +   ' data.csv ' ,   ' r ' )   as   f : 
               csv_reader   =   csv . DictReader ( f )    
               lines   =   [ line   for   line   in   csv_reader ] 
 
 In   [ 48 ] :   lines [ : 3 ]    
 Out [ 48 ] :   [ OrderedDict ( [ ( ' date ' ,   ' 2019-01-01 00:00:00 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no1 ' ,   ' -0.9627 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no2 ' ,   ' 0.1326 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no3 ' ,   ' -2.012 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no4 ' ,   ' -0.299 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no5 ' ,   ' -1.4554 ' ) ] ) , 
            OrderedDict ( [ ( ' date ' ,   ' 2019-01-01 01:00:00 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no1 ' ,   ' 0.8918 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no2 ' ,   ' 0.8904 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no3 ' ,   ' -0.3396 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no4 ' ,   ' -2.3485 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no5 ' ,   ' 2.0913 ' ) ] ) , 
            OrderedDict ( [ ( ' date ' ,   ' 2019-01-01 02:00:00 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no1 ' ,   ' -0.1899 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no2 ' ,   ' -0.9574 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no3 ' ,   ' 1.0258 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no4 ' ,   ' 0.6206 ' ) , 
                         ( ' no5 ' ,   ' -2.4693 ' ) ] ) ] 
 
 In   [ 49 ] :   ! rm   - f   $ path * 
 
 
 csv.reader()  returns every single line as a  list  object. 
 
 csv.DictReader()  returns every single line as a  OrderedDict  which is a special case of a  dict  object. 
 
 













 
 SQL Database 

 Python can work with any kind of  SQL  database and in general also with any kind of  NoSQL  database. In this case,  SQL  stands for  structured query language . One  SQL  or  relational  database that is delivered with Python by default is  SQLite3 . With it, the basic Python approach to  SQL  databases can be easily illustrated: 2 

 In   [ 50 ] :   import   sqlite3   as   sq3 
 
 In   [ 51 ] :   con   =   sq3 . connect ( path   +   ' numbs.db ' )    
 
 In   [ 52 ] :   query   =   ' CREATE TABLE numbs (Date date, No1 real, No2 real) '    
 
 In   [ 53 ] :   con . execute ( query )    
 Out [ 53 ] :   < sqlite3 . Cursor   at   0x1054efb20 > 
 
 In   [ 54 ] :   con . commit ( )    
 
 In   [ 55 ] :   q   =   con . execute    
 
 In   [ 56 ] :   q ( ' SELECT * FROM sqlite_master ' ) . fetchall ( )    
 Out [ 56 ] :   [ ( ' table ' , 
             ' numbs ' , 
             ' numbs ' , 
             2 , 
             ' CREATE TABLE numbs (Date date, No1 real, No2 real) ' ) ] 
 
 
 Opens a database connection; a file is created if it does not exist. 
 
 This is a  SQL  query that creates a table with three columns. 3 
 
 The query is executed … 
 
 … and the changes are committed. 
 
 This defines a short alias for the  con.execute()  method. 
 
 This fetches meta information about the database, showing the just created table as the single object. 
 

 Now that there is a database file with a table, this table can be populated with data. Each row consists of a  datetime  object and two  float  objects: 

 In   [ 57 ] :   import   datetime 
 
 In   [ 58 ] :   now   =   datetime . datetime . now ( ) 
           q ( ' INSERT INTO numbs VALUES(?, ?, ?) ' ,   ( now ,   0.12 ,   7.3 ) )    
 Out [ 58 ] :   < sqlite3 . Cursor   at   0x1054efc70 > 
 
 In   [ 59 ] :   np . random . seed ( 100 ) 
 
 In   [ 60 ] :   data   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( 10000 ,   2 ) ) . round ( 4 )    
 
 In   [ 61 ] :   % % time 
           for   row   in   data :    
               now   =   datetime . datetime . now ( ) 
               q ( ' INSERT INTO numbs VALUES(?, ?, ?) ' ,   ( now ,   row [ 0 ] ,   row [ 1 ] ) ) 
           con . commit ( ) 
 
           CPU   times :   user   111   ms ,   sys :   3.22   ms ,   total :   115   ms 
           Wall   time :   116   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 62 ] :   q ( ' SELECT * FROM numbs ' ) . fetchmany ( 4 )    
 Out [ 62 ] :   [ ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.043286 ' ,   0.12 ,   7.3 ) , 
            ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.071921 ' ,   - 1.7498 ,   0.3427 ) , 
            ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.072110 ' ,   1.153 ,   - 0.2524 ) , 
            ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.072160 ' ,   0.9813 ,   0.5142 ) ] 
 
 In   [ 63 ] :   q ( ' SELECT * FROM numbs WHERE no1 > 0.5 ' ) . fetchmany ( 4 )    
 Out [ 63 ] :   [ ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.072110 ' ,   1.153 ,   - 0.2524 ) , 
            ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.072160 ' ,   0.9813 ,   0.5142 ) , 
            ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.072257 ' ,   0.6727 ,   - 0.1044 ) , 
            ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.072319 ' ,   1.619 ,   1.5416 ) ] 
 
 In   [ 64 ] :   pointer   =   q ( ' SELECT * FROM numbs ' )    
 
 In   [ 65 ] :   for   i   in   range ( 3 ) : 
               print ( pointer . fetchone ( ) )    
 
           ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.043286 ' ,   0.12 ,   7.3 ) 
           ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.071921 ' ,   - 1.7498 ,   0.3427 ) 
           ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.072110 ' ,   1.153 ,   - 0.2524 ) 
 
 
 In   [ 66 ] :   rows   =   pointer . fetchall ( )    
           rows [ : 3 ] 
 Out [ 66 ] :   [ ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.072160 ' ,   0.9813 ,   0.5142 ) , 
            ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.072184 ' ,   0.2212 ,   - 1.07 ) , 
            ( ' 2018-01-18 10:05:24.072202 ' ,   - 0.1895 ,   0.255 ) ] 
 
 
 Writes as single row (or record) to the  numbs  table. 
 
 Creates a larger dummy data set as  ndarray  object. 
 
 Iterates over the rows of the  ndarray  object. 
 
 Retrieves a number of rows from the table. 
 
 The same but with a condition on the values in the  no1  column. 
 
 Defines a pointer object … 
 
 … that behaves like a generator object. 
 
 .fetchall()  retrieves all the remaining rows. 
 

 Finally, one might want to delete the table object in the database if not required anymore. 

 In   [ 67 ] :   q ( ' DROP TABLE IF EXISTS numbs ' )    
 Out [ 67 ] :   < sqlite3 . Cursor   at   0x1054eff80 > 
 
 In   [ 68 ] :   q ( ' SELECT * FROM sqlite_master ' ) . fetchall ( )    
 Out [ 68 ] :   [ ] 
 
 In   [ 69 ] :   con . close ( )    
 
 In   [ 70 ] :   ! rm   - f   $ path *    
 
 
 Removes the table from the database. 
 
 There are no table objects left after this operation. 
 
 Closes the database connection. 
 
 Removes the database file from disk. 
 

 SQL  databases are a rather broad topic; indeed, too broad and complex to be covered in any significant way in this chapter. The basic messages are: 

 
 
 Python integrates well with almost any database technology. 
 
 
 The basic  SQL  syntax is mainly determined by the database in use; the rest is, as we say,  Pythonic . 
 
 

 A few more examples based on  SQLite3  follow further below. 
 













 
 Writing and Reading NumPy Arrays 

 NumPy  itself has functions to write and read  ndarray  objects in a convenient and performant fashion. This saves effort in some circumstances, such as when you have to convert  NumPy   dtype  objects into specific database types (e.g., for  SQLite3 ). To illustrate that  NumPy  can sometimes be an efficient replacement for a  SQL -based approach, the following code replicates the example from before with  NumPy . 

 Instead of  pandas , the code uses the  np.arange()  function of  NumPy  to generate a  ndarray  object with  datetime  objects stored: 4 

 In   [ 71 ] :   dtimes   =   np . arange ( ' 2019-01-01 10:00:00 ' ,   ' 2025-12-31 22:00:00 ' , 
                             dtype = ' datetime64[m] ' )    
 
 In   [ 72 ] :   len ( dtimes ) 
 Out [ 72 ] :   3681360 
 
 In   [ 73 ] :   dty   =   np . dtype ( [ ( ' Date ' ,   ' datetime64[m] ' ) , 
                           ( ' No1 ' ,   ' f ' ) ,   ( ' No2 ' ,   ' f ' ) ] )    
 
 In   [ 74 ] :   data   =   np . zeros ( len ( dtimes ) ,   dtype = dty )    
 
 In   [ 75 ] :   data [ ' Date ' ]   =   dtimes    
 
 In   [ 76 ] :   a   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( len ( dtimes ) ,   2 ) ) . round ( 4 )    
 
 In   [ 77 ] :   data [ ' No1 ' ]   =   a [ : ,   0 ]    
           data [ ' No2 ' ]   =   a [ : ,   1 ]    
 
 In   [ 78 ] :   data . nbytes    
 Out [ 78 ] :   58901760 
 
 
 Creates an  ndarray  object with  datetime  as  dtype . 
 
 The special  dtype  object for the record array. 
 
 The  ndarray  objects instantiated with the special  dtype . 
 
 This populates the  Date  column. 
 
 The dummy data sets … 
 
 … which populates the  No1  and  No2  columns. 
 
 The size of the record array in bytes. 
 

 Saving of  ndarray  objects is highly optimized and therefore quite fast. Almost 60 MB of data take about 0.1 seconds to save on disk (here using a SSD). A larger  ndarray  object with 480 MB in size takes about 1 second to save on disk. 

 In   [ 79 ] :   % time   np . save ( path   +   ' array ' ,   data )    
 
           CPU   times :   user   4.06   ms ,   sys :   99.3   ms ,   total :   103   ms 
           Wall   time :   107   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 80 ] :   ll   $ path *    
 
           - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    58901888   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / array . npy 
 
 
 In   [ 81 ] :   % time   np . load ( path   +   ' array.npy ' )    
 
           CPU   times :   user   1.81   ms ,   sys :   47.4   ms ,   total :   49.2   ms 
           Wall   time :   46.7   ms 
 
 
 Out [ 81 ] :   array ( [ ( ' 2019-01-01T10:00 ' ,    1.51310003 ,    0.69730002 ) , 
                  ( ' 2019-01-01T10:01 ' ,   - 1.722       ,   - 0.4815      ) , 
                  ( ' 2019-01-01T10:02 ' ,    0.8251      ,    0.3019      ) ,   . . . , 
                  ( ' 2025-12-31T21:57 ' ,    1.37199998 ,    0.64459997 ) , 
                  ( ' 2025-12-31T21:58 ' ,   - 1.25419998 ,    0.1612      ) , 
                  ( ' 2025-12-31T21:59 ' ,   - 1.1997      ,   - 1.097       ) ] , 
                 dtype = [ ( ' Date ' ,   ' <M8[m] ' ) ,   ( ' No1 ' ,   ' <f4 ' ) ,   ( ' No2 ' ,   ' <f4 ' ) ] ) 
 
 In   [ 82 ] :   % time   data   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( 10000 ,   6000 ) ) . round ( 4 )    
 
           CPU   times :   user   2.81   s ,   sys :   354   ms ,   total :   3.17   s 
           Wall   time :   3.23   s 
 
 
 In   [ 83 ] :   data . nbytes    
 Out [ 83 ] :   480000000 
 
 In   [ 84 ] :   % time   np . save ( path   +   ' array ' ,   data )    
 
           CPU   times :   user   23.9   ms ,   sys :   878   ms ,   total :   902   ms 
           Wall   time :   964   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 85 ] :   ll   $ path *    
 
           - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    480000080   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / array . npy 
 
 
 In   [ 86 ] :   % time   np . load ( path   +   ' array.npy ' )    
 
           CPU   times :   user   1.95   ms ,   sys :   441   ms ,   total :   443   ms 
           Wall   time :   441   ms 
 
 
 Out [ 86 ] :   array ( [ [   0.3066 ,    0.5951 ,    0.5826 ,   . . . ,    1.6773 ,    0.4294 ,   - 0.2216 ] , 
                  [   0.8769 ,    0.7292 ,   - 0.9557 ,   . . . ,    0.5084 ,    0.9635 ,   - 0.4443 ] , 
                  [ - 1.2202 ,   - 2.5509 ,   - 0.0575 ,   . . . ,   - 1.6128 ,    0.4662 ,   - 1.3645 ] , 
                  . . . , 
                  [ - 0.5598 ,    0.2393 ,   - 2.3716 ,   . . . ,    1.7669 ,    0.2462 ,    1.035   ] , 
                  [   0.273   ,    0.8216 ,   - 0.0749 ,   . . . ,   - 0.0552 ,   - 0.8396 ,    0.3077 ] , 
                  [ - 0.6305 ,    0.8331 ,    1.3702 ,   . . . ,    0.3493 ,    0.1981 ,    0.2037 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 87 ] :   ! rm   - f   $ path * 
 
 
 This saves the record  ndarray  object on disk. 
 
 The size on disk is hardly larger than in-memory (due to binary storage). 
 
 This loads the record  ndarray  object from disk. 
 
 A larger regular  ndarray  object. 
 

 These examples illustrate that writing to disk in this case is mainly hardware-bound, since 480 MB/s represents roughly the advertised writing speed of standard SSDs at the time of this writing (512 MB/s). 

 In any case, you can expect that this form of data storage and retrieval is much faster as compared to  SQL  databases or using the standard  pickle  library for serialization. There are two reasons: first, the data is mainly numeric; second,  NumPy  implements binary storage which reduces the overhead almost to zero. Of course, you do not have the functionality of a  SQL  database available with this approach, but  PyTables  will help in this regard, as subsequent sections show. 
 





 













 
 I/O with pandas 

 One of the major strengths of  pandas  is that it can read and write different data formats natively, among others, including: 

 
 
 CSV  (comma-separated value) 
 
 
 SQL  ( Structured Query Language ) 
 
 
 XLS/XSLX  (Microsoft  Excel  files) 
 
 
 JSON  ( JavaScript   Object Notation ) 
 
 
 HTML  ( HyperText Markup Language ) 
 
 

 Table 9-1  lists supported formats and the corresponding import and export functions/methods of  pandas  and the  DataFrame  class, respectively. The parameters that the import functions take are listed and described in [Link to Come] (depending on the functions, some other conventions might apply). 
 
 Table 9-1.  Import-export functions and methods 
 
 
 Format 
 Input 
 Output 
 Remark 
 
 
 
 
 CSV 
 pd.read_csv() 
 .to_csv() 
 Text file 
 
 
 XLS/XLSX 
 pd.read_excel() 
 .to_excel() 
 Spreadsheet 
 
 
 HDF 
 pd.read_hdf() 
 .to_hdf() 
 HDF5  database 
 
 
 SQL 
 pd.read_sql() 
 .to_sql() 
 SQL  table 
 
 
 JSON 
 pd.read_json() 
 .to_json() 
 JavaScript Object Notation 
 
 
 MSGPACK 
 pd.read_msgpack() 
 .to_msgpack() 
 Portable binary format 
 
 
 HTML 
 pd.read_html() 
 .to_html() 
 HTML  code 
 
 
 GBQ 
 pd.read_gbq() 
 .to_gbq() 
 Google Big Query  format 
 
 
 DTA 
 pd.read_stata() 
 .to_stata() 
 Formats 104, 105, 108, 113-115, 117 
 
 
 Any 
 pd.read_clipboard() 
 .to_clipboard() 
 E.g., from  HTML  page 
 
 
 Any 
 pd.read_pickle() 
 .to_pickle() 
 (Structured) Python object 
 
 
 

 The test case is again a larger set of  float  objects: 

 In   [ 88 ]:   data   =   np . random . standard_normal (( 1000000 ,   5 )) . round ( 4 ) 

 In   [ 89 ]:   data [: 3 ] 
 Out [ 89 ]:   array ([[   0.4918 ,    1.3707 ,    0.137   ,    0.3981 ,   - 1.0059 ], 
                 [   0.4516 ,    1.4445 ,    0.0555 ,   - 0.0397 ,    0.44    ], 
                 [   0.1629 ,   - 0.8473 ,   - 0.8223 ,   - 0.4621 ,   - 0.5137 ]]) 

 To this end, we will also revisit  SQLite3  and will compare the performance with alternative formats using  pandas . 








 
 SQL Database 

 All that follows with regard to  SQLite3  should be familiar by now. 

 In   [ 90 ] :   filename   =   path   +   ' numbers ' 
 
 In   [ 91 ] :   con   =   sq3 . Connection ( filename   +   ' .db ' ) 
 
 In   [ 92 ] :   query   =   ' CREATE TABLE numbers (No1 real, No2 real, \
                  No3 real, No4 real, No5 real) '    
 
 In   [ 93 ] :   q   =   con . execute 
           qm   =   con . executemany 
 
 In   [ 94 ] :   q ( query ) 
 Out [ 94 ] :   < sqlite3 . Cursor   at   0x1054e2260 > 
 
 
 A table with five columns for real numbers ( float  objects). 
 

 This time, the  .executemany()  method can be applied since the data is available in a single  ndarray  object. Reading and working with the data works as before. Query results can also be visualized easily (see  Figure 9-1 ). 

 In   [ 95 ] :   % % time 
           qm ( ' INSERT INTO numbers VALUES (?, ?, ?, ?, ?) ' ,   data )    
           con . commit ( ) 
 
           CPU   times :   user   7.16   s ,   sys :   147   ms ,   total :   7.3   s 
           Wall   time :   7.39   s 
 
 
 In   [ 96 ] :   ll   $ path * 
 
           - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    52633600   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / numbers . db 
 
 
 In   [ 97 ] :   % % time 
           temp   =   q ( ' SELECT * FROM numbers ' ) . fetchall ( )    
           print ( temp [ : 3 ] ) 
 
           [ ( 0.4918 ,   1.3707 ,   0.137 ,   0.3981 ,   - 1.0059 ) ,   ( 0.4516 ,   1.4445 ,   0.0555 ,   - 0.0397 ,   0.44 ) ,   ( 0.1629 ,   - 0.8473 ,   - 0.8223 ,   - 0.4621 ,   - 0.5137 ) ] 
           CPU   times :   user   1.86   s ,   sys :   138   ms ,   total :   2   s 
           Wall   time :   2.07   s 
 
 
 In   [ 98 ] :   % % time 
           query   =   ' SELECT * FROM numbers WHERE No1 > 0 AND No2 < 0 ' 
           res   =   np . array ( q ( query ) . fetchall ( ) ) . round ( 3 )    
 
           CPU   times :   user   770   ms ,   sys :   73.9   ms ,   total :   844   ms 
           Wall   time :   854   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 99 ] :   res   =   res [ : : 100 ]    
           plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
           plt . plot ( res [ : ,   0 ] ,   res [ : ,   1 ] ,   ' ro ' )    
           plt . savefig ( ' ../../images/ch09/io_01.png ' ) ; 
 
 
 Inserts the whole data set in a single step into the table. 
 
 Retrieves all the rows from the table in a single step. 
 
 Retrieves a selection of the rows and transforms it to a  ndarray  object. 
 
 Plots a sub-set of the query result. 
 

 
 
 Figure 9-1.  Scatter plot of the query result (selection) 
 
 













 
 From SQL to pandas 

 A generally more efficient approach, however, is the reading of either whole tables or query results with  pandas . When you are able to read a whole table into memory, analytical queries can generally be executed much faster than when using the  SQL  disk-based approach. 

 Reading the whole table with  pandas  takes roughly the same amount of time as reading it into a  NumPy   ndarray  object. There as here, the bottleneck is the  SQL  database: 

 In   [ 100 ] :   % time   data   =   pd . read_sql ( ' SELECT * FROM numbers ' ,   con )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   2.11   s ,   sys :   175   ms ,   total :   2.29   s 
            Wall   time :   2.33   s 
 
 
 In   [ 101 ] :   data . head ( ) 
 Out [ 101 ] :         No1       No2       No3       No4       No5 
            0    0.4918    1.3707    0.1370    0.3981   - 1.0059 
            1    0.4516    1.4445    0.0555   - 0.0397    0.4400 
            2    0.1629   - 0.8473   - 0.8223   - 0.4621   - 0.5137 
            3    1.3064    0.9125    0.5142   - 0.7868   - 0.3398 
            4   - 0.1148   - 1.5215   - 0.7045   - 1.0042   - 0.0600 
 
 
 Reads all rows of the table into the  DataFrame  object named  data . 
 

 The data is now in-memory. This allows for much faster analytics. The speed-up is often an order of magnitude or more.  pandas  can also master more complex queries, although it is neither meant nor able to replace  SQL  databases when it comes to complex, relational data structures. The result of the query with multiple conditions combined is shown in  Figure 9-2 . 

 In   [ 102 ] :   % time   data [ ( data [ ' No1 ' ]   >   0 )   &   ( data [ ' No2 ' ]   <   0 ) ] . head ( )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   19.4   ms ,   sys :   9.56   ms ,   total :   28.9   ms 
            Wall   time :   27.5   ms 
 
 
 Out [ 102 ] :          No1       No2       No3       No4       No5 
            2     0.1629   - 0.8473   - 0.8223   - 0.4621   - 0.5137 
            5     0.1893   - 0.0207   - 0.2104    0.9419    0.2551 
            8     1.4784   - 0.3333   - 0.7050    0.3586   - 0.3937 
            10    0.8092   - 0.9899    1.0364   - 1.0453    0.0579 
            11    0.9065   - 0.7757   - 0.9267    0.7797    0.0863 
 
 In   [ 103 ] :   % % time 
            res   =   data [ [ ' No1 ' ,   ' No2 ' ] ] [ ( ( data [ ' No1 ' ]   >   0.5 )   |   ( data [ ' No1 ' ]   <   - 0.5 ) ) 
                                 &   ( ( data [ ' No2 ' ]   <   - 1 )   |   ( data [ ' No2 ' ]   >   1 ) ) ]    
 
            CPU   times :   user   20.6   ms ,   sys :   9.18   ms ,   total :   29.8   ms 
            Wall   time :   28   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 104 ] :   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
            plt . plot ( res [ ' No1 ' ] ,   res [ ' No2 ' ] ,   ' ro ' ) ; 
            plt . savefig ( ' ../../images/ch09/io_02.png ' ) ; 
 
 
 Two conditions combined logically. 
 
 Four conditions combined logically. 
 

 
 
 Figure 9-2.  Scatter plot of the query result (selection) 
 

 As expected, using the in-memory analytics capabilities of  pandas  leads to a significant speedup, provided  pandas  is able to replicate the respective  SQL  statement. 

 This is not the only advantage of using  pandas  since  pandas , among others, is tightly integrated with  PyTables  — the topic of the subsequent section. Here, it suffices to know that the combination of both can speed up I/O operations considerably. This is shown in the following: 

 In   [ 105 ] :   h5s   =   pd . HDFStore ( filename   +   ' .h5s ' ,   ' w ' )    
 
 In   [ 106 ] :   % time   h5s [ ' data ' ]   =   data    
 
            CPU   times :   user   33   ms ,   sys :   43.3   ms ,   total :   76.3   ms 
            Wall   time :   85.8   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 107 ] :   h5s    
 Out [ 107 ] :   < class   ' pandas . io . pytables . HDFStore ' > 
            File   path :   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / numbers . h5s 
 
 In   [ 108 ] :   h5s . close ( )    
 
 
 Opens a  HDF5  database file for writing; in  pandas  a  HDFStore  object is created. 
 
 The complete  DataFrame  object is stored in the database file via binary storage. 
 
 The  HDFStore  object information. 
 
 The database file is closed. 
 

 The whole  DataFrame  with all the data from the original  SQL  table is written much faster when compared to the same procedure with  SQLite3 . Reading is even faster: 

 In   [ 109 ] :   % % time 
            h5s   =   pd . HDFStore ( filename   +   ' .h5s ' ,   ' r ' )    
            data_   =   h5s [ ' data ' ]    
            h5s . close ( )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   8.24   ms ,   sys :   21.2   ms ,   total :   29.4   ms 
            Wall   time :   28.5   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 110 ] :   data_   is   data    
 Out [ 110 ] :   False 
 
 In   [ 111 ] :   ( data_   ==   data ) . all ( )    
 Out [ 111 ] :   No1      True 
            No2      True 
            No3      True 
            No4      True 
            No5      True 
            dtype :   bool 
 
 In   [ 112 ] :   np . allclose ( data_ ,   data )    
 Out [ 112 ] :   True 
 
 In   [ 113 ] :   ll   $ path *    
 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    52633600   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / numbers . db 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    48007192   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / numbers . h5s 
 
 
 Opens the  HDF5  database file for reading. 
 
 The  DataFrame  is read and stored in-memory as  data_ . 
 
 The database file is closed. 
 
 The two  DataFrame  objects are not the same. 
 
 However, they contain now the same data. 
 
 Binary storage generally comes with less size overhead compared to  SQL  tables, for instance. 
 
 













 
 Data as CSV File 

 One of the most widely used formats to exchange financial data is the  CSV  format. Although it is not really standardized, it can be processed by any platform and the vast majority of applications concerned with data and financial analytics. The previous section shows how to write and read data to and from  CSV  files with standard Python functionality (see  “Reading and Writing Text Files” ).  pandas  makes this whole procedure a bit more convenient, the code more concise, and the execution in general faster (see also  Figure 9-3 ): 

 In   [ 114 ] :   % time   data . to_csv ( filename   +   ' .csv ' )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   6.82   s ,   sys :   277   ms ,   total :   7.1   s 
            Wall   time :   7.54   s 
 
 
 In   [ 115 ] :   ll   $ path 
 
            total   282184 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    43834157   Jan   18   10 : 05   numbers . csv 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    52633600   Jan   18   10 : 05   numbers . db 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    48007192   Jan   18   10 : 05   numbers . h5s 
 
 
 In   [ 116 ] :   % time   df   =   pd . read_csv ( filename   +   ' .csv ' )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   1.4   s ,   sys :   124   ms ,   total :   1.53   s 
            Wall   time :   1.58   s 
 
 
 In   [ 117 ] :   df [ [ ' No1 ' ,   ' No2 ' ,   ' No3 ' ,   ' No4 ' ] ] . hist ( bins = 20 ,   figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) ; 
            plt . savefig ( ' ../../images/ch09/io_03.png ' ) ; 
 
 
 The  .to_csv()  method writes the  DataFrame  data to disk in  CSV  format. 
 
 The  pd.read_csv()  then reads it again back into memory as a new  DataFrame  object. 
 

 
 
 Figure 9-3.  Histograms for selected columns 
 
 













 
 Data as Excel File 

 Although working with  Excel  spreadsheets is the topic of a later chapter, the following code briefly demonstrate how  pandas  can write data in  Excel  format and read data from  Excel  spreadsheets. We restrict the data set to 100,000 rows in this case: 

 In   [ 118 ] :   % time   data [ : 100000 ] . to_excel ( filename   +   ' .xlsx ' )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   23.2   s ,   sys :   498   ms ,   total :   23.7   s 
            Wall   time :   23.9   s 
 
 
 In   [ 119 ] :   % time   df   =   pd . read_excel ( filename   +   ' .xlsx ' ,   ' Sheet1 ' )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   5.47   s ,   sys :   74.7   ms ,   total :   5.54   s 
            Wall   time :   5.57   s 
 
 
 In   [ 120 ] :   df . cumsum ( ) . plot ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) ; 
            plt . savefig ( ' ../../images/ch09/io_04.png ' ) ; 
 In   [ 121 ] :   ll   $ path * 
 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    43834157   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / numbers . csv 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    52633600   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / numbers . db 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    48007192   Jan   18   10 : 05   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / numbers . h5s 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff     4032639   Jan   18   10 : 06   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / numbers . xlsx 
 
 
 In   [ 122 ] :   rm   - f   $ path * 
 
 
 The  .to_excel()  method writes the  DataFrame  data to disk in  XLSX  format. 
 
 The  pd.read_excel()  then reads it again back into memory as a new  DataFrame  object, also specifying the sheet from which to read. 
 

 
 
 Figure 9-4.  Line plots for all columns 
 

 Generating the  Excel  spreadsheet file with a smaller subset of the data takes quite a while. This illustrates what kind of overhead the spreadsheet structure brings along with it. 

 Inspection of the generated files reveals that the  DataFrame  with  HDFStore  combination is the most compact alternative (using compression, as described later in this chapter, further increases the benefits). The same amount of data as a  CSV  file—i.e., as a text file—is somewhat larger in size. This is one reason for the slower performance when working with  CSV  files, the other being the very fact that they are " only " general text files. 
 





 













 
 Fast I/O with PyTables 

 PyTables  is a Python binding for the  HDF5  database standard (see  http://www.hdfgroup.org ). It is specifically designed to optimize the performance of I/O operations and make best use of the available hardware. The library’s import name is  tables . Similar to  pandas  when it comes to in-memory analytics,  PyTables  is neither able nor meant to be a full replacement for  SQL  databases. However, it brings along some features that further close the gap. For example, a  PyTables  database can have many tables, and it supports compression and indexing and also nontrivial queries on tables. In addition, it can store  NumPy  arrays efficiently and has its own flavor of array-like data structures. 

 To begin with, some imports: 

 In   [ 123 ] :   import   tables   as   tb    
            import   datetime   as   dt 
 
 
 The package name is  PyTables , the import name is  tables . 
 








 
 Working with Tables 

 PyTables  provides a file-based database format, similar to  SQLite3 . 5 . The following opens a database file and creates a table: 

 In   [ 124 ] :   filename   =   path   +   ' pytab.h5 ' 
 
 In   [ 125 ] :   h5   =   tb . open_file ( filename ,   ' w ' )    
 
 In   [ 126 ] :   row_des   =   { 
                ' Date ' :   tb . StringCol ( 26 ,   pos = 1 ) ,    
                ' No1 ' :   tb . IntCol ( pos = 2 ) ,    
                ' No2 ' :   tb . IntCol ( pos = 3 ) ,    
                ' No3 ' :   tb . Float64Col ( pos = 4 ) ,    
                ' No4 ' :   tb . Float64Col ( pos = 5 )    
                } 
 
 In   [ 127 ] :   rows   =   2000000 
 
 In   [ 128 ] :   filters   =   tb . Filters ( complevel = 0 )    
 
 In   [ 129 ] :   tab   =   h5 . create_table ( ' / ' ,   ' ints_floats ' ,    
                                  row_des ,    
                                  title = ' Integers and Floats ' ,    
                                  expectedrows = rows ,    
                                  filters = filters )    
 
 In   [ 130 ] :   type ( tab ) 
 Out [ 130 ] :   tables . table . Table 
 
 In   [ 131 ] :   tab 
 Out [ 131 ] :   / ints_floats   ( Table ( 0 , ) )   ' Integers and Floats ' 
              description   : =   { 
              " Date " :   StringCol ( itemsize = 26 ,   shape = ( ) ,   dflt = b ' ' ,   pos = 0 ) , 
              " No1 " :   Int32Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ,   pos = 1 ) , 
              " No2 " :   Int32Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ,   pos = 2 ) , 
              " No3 " :   Float64Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ,   pos = 3 ) , 
              " No4 " :   Float64Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ,   pos = 4 ) } 
              byteorder   : =   ' little ' 
              chunkshape   : =   ( 2621 , ) 
 
 
 Opens the database file in  HDF5  binary storage format. 
 
 The  date  column for date-time information (as a  str  object). 
 
 The two columns to store  int  objects. 
 
 The two columns to store  float  objects. 
 
 Via  Filters  objects, compression levels can be specified, among others. 
 
 The node (path) and technical name of the table. 
 
 The description of the row data structure. 
 
 The name (title) of the table. 
 
 The expected number of rows; allows for optimizations. 
 
 The  Filters  object to be used for the table. 
 

 To populate the table with numerical data, two  ndarray  objects with random numbers are generated. One with random integers, the other one with random floating point numbers. The population of the table happens via a simple Python loop. 

 In   [ 132 ] :   pointer   =   tab . row    
 
 In   [ 133 ] :   ran_int   =   np . random . randint ( 0 ,   10000 ,   size = ( rows ,   2 ) )    
 
 In   [ 134 ] :   ran_flo   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( rows ,   2 ) ) . round ( 4 )    
 
 In   [ 135 ] :   % % time 
            for   i   in   range ( rows ) : 
                pointer [ ' Date ' ]   =   dt . datetime . now ( )    
                pointer [ ' No1 ' ]   =   ran_int [ i ,   0 ]    
                pointer [ ' No2 ' ]   =   ran_int [ i ,   1 ]    
                pointer [ ' No3 ' ]   =   ran_flo [ i ,   0 ]    
                pointer [ ' No4 ' ]   =   ran_flo [ i ,   1 ]    
                pointer . append ( )    
            tab . flush ( )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   8.36   s ,   sys :   136   ms ,   total :   8.49   s 
            Wall   time :   8.92   s 
 
 
 In   [ 136 ] :   tab    
 Out [ 136 ] :   / ints_floats   ( Table ( 2000000 , ) )   ' Integers and Floats ' 
              description   : =   { 
              " Date " :   StringCol ( itemsize = 26 ,   shape = ( ) ,   dflt = b ' ' ,   pos = 0 ) , 
              " No1 " :   Int32Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ,   pos = 1 ) , 
              " No2 " :   Int32Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ,   pos = 2 ) , 
              " No3 " :   Float64Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ,   pos = 3 ) , 
              " No4 " :   Float64Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ,   pos = 4 ) } 
              byteorder   : =   ' little ' 
              chunkshape   : =   ( 2621 , ) 
 
 In   [ 137 ] :   ll   $ path * 
 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    100156248   Jan   18   10 : 06   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / pytab . h5 
 
 
 A pointer object is created. 
 
 The  ndarray  object with the random  int  objects. 
 
 The  ndarray  object with the random  float  objects. 
 
 The  datetime  object, the two  int  and two  float  objects are written row-by-row. 
 
 The new row is appended. 
 
 All written rows are flushed, i.e. committed as permanent changes. 
 
 The changes are reflected in the  Table  object description. 
 

 The Python loop is quite slow in this case. There is a more performant and Pythonic way to accomplish the same result, by the use of  NumPy  structured arrays. Equipped with the complete data set stored in a structured array, the creation of the table boils down to a single line of code. Note that the row description is not needed anymore;  PyTables  uses the  dtype  object of the structured array to infer the data types instead: 

 In   [ 138 ] :   dty   =   np . dtype ( [ ( ' Date ' ,   ' S26 ' ) ,   ( ' No1 ' ,   ' <i4 ' ) ,   ( ' No2 ' ,   ' <i4 ' ) , 
                                             ( ' No3 ' ,   ' <f8 ' ) ,   ( ' No4 ' ,   ' <f8 ' ) ] )    
 
 In   [ 139 ] :   sarray   =   np . zeros ( len ( ran_int ) ,   dtype = dty )    
 
 In   [ 140 ] :   sarray [ : 4 ]    
 Out [ 140 ] :   array ( [ ( b ' ' ,   0 ,   0 ,    0. ,    0. ) ,   ( b ' ' ,   0 ,   0 ,    0. ,    0. ) ,   ( b ' ' ,   0 ,   0 ,    0. ,    0. ) , 
                   ( b ' ' ,   0 ,   0 ,    0. ,    0. ) ] , 
                  dtype = [ ( ' Date ' ,   ' S26 ' ) ,   ( ' No1 ' ,   ' <i4 ' ) ,   ( ' No2 ' ,   ' <i4 ' ) ,   ( ' No3 ' ,   ' <f8 ' ) ,   ( ' No4 ' ,   ' <f8 ' ) ] ) 
 
 In   [ 141 ] :   % % time 
            sarray [ ' Date ' ]   =   dt . datetime . now ( )    
            sarray [ ' No1 ' ]   =   ran_int [ : ,   0 ]    
            sarray [ ' No2 ' ]   =   ran_int [ : ,   1 ]    
            sarray [ ' No3 ' ]   =   ran_flo [ : ,   0 ]    
            sarray [ ' No4 ' ]   =   ran_flo [ : ,   1 ]    
 
            CPU   times :   user   82.7   ms ,   sys :   37.9   ms ,   total :   121   ms 
            Wall   time :   133   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 142 ] :   % % time 
            h5 . create_table ( ' / ' ,   ' ints_floats_from_array ' ,   sarray , 
                                  title = ' Integers and Floats ' , 
                                  expectedrows = rows ,   filters = filters )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   39   ms ,   sys :   61   ms ,   total :   100   ms 
            Wall   time :   123   ms 
 
 
 Out [ 142 ] :   / ints_floats_from_array   ( Table ( 2000000 , ) )   ' Integers and Floats ' 
              description   : =   { 
              " Date " :   StringCol ( itemsize = 26 ,   shape = ( ) ,   dflt = b ' ' ,   pos = 0 ) , 
              " No1 " :   Int32Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ,   pos = 1 ) , 
              " No2 " :   Int32Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ,   pos = 2 ) , 
              " No3 " :   Float64Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ,   pos = 3 ) , 
              " No4 " :   Float64Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ,   pos = 4 ) } 
              byteorder   : =   ' little ' 
              chunkshape   : =   ( 2621 , ) 
 
 
 Defines the special  dtype  object. 
 
 Creates the structured array with zeros (and empty strings). 
 
 A few records from the  ndarray  object. 
 
 The columns of the  ndarray  object are populated at once. 
 
 This creates the  Table  object  and  populates it with the data. 
 

 This approach is an order of magnitude faster, has more concise code and achieves the same result. 

 In   [ 143 ] :   type ( h5 ) 
 Out [ 143 ] :   tables . file . File 
 
 In   [ 144 ] :   h5    
 Out [ 144 ] :   File ( filename = / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / pytab . h5 ,   title = ' ' ,   mode = ' w ' ,   root_uep = ' / ' ,   filters = Filters ( complevel = 0 ,   shuffle = False ,   bitshuffle = False ,   fletcher32 = False ,   least_significant_digit = None ) ) 
            /   ( RootGroup )   ' ' 
            / ints_floats   ( Table ( 2000000 , ) )   ' Integers and Floats ' 
              description   : =   { 
              " Date " :   StringCol ( itemsize = 26 ,   shape = ( ) ,   dflt = b ' ' ,   pos = 0 ) , 
              " No1 " :   Int32Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ,   pos = 1 ) , 
              " No2 " :   Int32Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ,   pos = 2 ) , 
              " No3 " :   Float64Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ,   pos = 3 ) , 
              " No4 " :   Float64Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ,   pos = 4 ) } 
              byteorder   : =   ' little ' 
              chunkshape   : =   ( 2621 , ) 
            / ints_floats_from_array   ( Table ( 2000000 , ) )   ' Integers and Floats ' 
              description   : =   { 
              " Date " :   StringCol ( itemsize = 26 ,   shape = ( ) ,   dflt = b ' ' ,   pos = 0 ) , 
              " No1 " :   Int32Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ,   pos = 1 ) , 
              " No2 " :   Int32Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ,   pos = 2 ) , 
              " No3 " :   Float64Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ,   pos = 3 ) , 
              " No4 " :   Float64Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ,   pos = 4 ) } 
              byteorder   : =   ' little ' 
              chunkshape   : =   ( 2621 , ) 
 
 In   [ 145 ] :   h5 . remove_node ( ' / ' ,   ' ints_floats_from_array ' )    
 
 
 The description of the  File  object with the two  Table  objects. 
 
 This removes the second  Table  object with the redundant data. 
 

 The  Table  object behaves pretty similar to  NumPy  structured  ndarray  objects in most cases (see also  Figure 9-5 ): 

 In   [ 146 ] :   tab [ : 3 ]    
 Out [ 146 ] :   array ( [ ( b ' 2018-01-18 10:06:28.516235 ' ,   8576 ,   5991 ,   - 0.0528 ,    0.2468 ) , 
                   ( b ' 2018-01-18 10:06:28.516332 ' ,   2990 ,   9310 ,   - 0.0261 ,    0.3932 ) , 
                   ( b ' 2018-01-18 10:06:28.516344 ' ,   4400 ,   4823 ,    0.9133 ,    0.2579 ) ] , 
                  dtype = [ ( ' Date ' ,   ' S26 ' ) ,   ( ' No1 ' ,   ' <i4 ' ) ,   ( ' No2 ' ,   ' <i4 ' ) ,   ( ' No3 ' ,   ' <f8 ' ) ,   ( ' No4 ' ,   ' <f8 ' ) ] ) 
 
 In   [ 147 ] :   tab [ : 4 ] [ ' No4 ' ]    
 Out [ 147 ] :   array ( [   0.2468 ,    0.3932 ,    0.2579 ,   - 0.5582 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 148 ] :   % time   np . sum ( tab [ : ] [ ' No3 ' ] )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   64.5   ms ,   sys :   97.1   ms ,   total :   162   ms 
            Wall   time :   165   ms 
 
 
 Out [ 148 ] :   88.854299999999697 
 
 In   [ 149 ] :   % time   np . sum ( np . sqrt ( tab [ : ] [ ' No1 ' ] ) )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   59.3   ms ,   sys :   69.4   ms ,   total :   129   ms 
            Wall   time :   130   ms 
 
 
 Out [ 149 ] :   133349920.36892509 
 
 In   [ 150 ] :   % % time 
            plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
            plt . hist ( tab [ : ] [ ' No3 ' ] ,   bins = 30 ) ;    
            plt . savefig ( ' ../../images/ch09/io_05.png ' ) ; 
 
            CPU   times :   user   244   ms ,   sys :   67.6   ms ,   total :   312   ms 
            Wall   time :   340   ms 
 
 
 Selecting rows via indexing. 
 
 Selecting columns values only via indexing. 
 
 Applying  NumPy  universal functions. 
 
 Plotting a column from the  Table  object. 
 

 
 
 Figure 9-5.  Histogram of column data 
 

 PyTables  also provides flexible tools to query data via typical  SQL -like statements, as in the following example (the result of which is illustrated in  Figure 9-6 ; compare it with  Figure 9-2 , based on a  pandas  query): 

 In   [ 151 ] :   query   =   ' ((No3 < -0.5) | (No3 > 0.5)) & ((No4 < -1) | (No4 > 1)) '    
 
 In   [ 152 ] :   iterator   =   tab . where ( query )    
 
 In   [ 153 ] :   % time   res   =   [ ( row [ ' No3 ' ] ,   row [ ' No4 ' ] )   for   row   in   iterator ]    
 
            CPU   times :   user   487   ms ,   sys :   128   ms ,   total :   615   ms 
            Wall   time :   637   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 154 ] :   res   =   np . array ( res )    
            res [ : 3 ] 
 Out [ 154 ] :   array ( [ [   0.7694 ,    1.4866 ] , 
                   [   0.9201 ,    1.3346 ] , 
                   [   1.4701 ,    1.8776 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 155 ] :   plt . figure ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) 
            plt . plot ( res . T [ 0 ] ,   res . T [ 1 ] ,   ' ro ' ) ; 
            plt . savefig ( ' ../../images/ch09/io_06.png ' ) ; 
 
 
 The query as a  str  object, four conditions combined by logical operators. 
 
 The iterator object based on the query. 
 
 The rows resulting from the query are collected via a list comprehension … 
 
 … and transformed to a  ndarray  object. 
 

 
 
 Figure 9-6.  Histogram of column data 
 
 Fast Queries 
 Both  pandas  and  PyTables  are able to process relatively complex,  SQL -like queries and selections. They are both optimized for speed when it comes to such operations. However, there are of course limits to these approaches compared to relational databases. But for most numerical and financial applications they are often not decisive. 
 

 As the following examples show, working with data stored in  PyTables  as a  Table  objects makes you feel like working with  NumPy  or  pandas  and in-memory, both from a  syntax  and a  performance  point of view: 

 In   [ 156 ]:   %% time 
           values   =   tab [:][ 'No3' ] 
           print ( 'Max  %18.3f '   %   values . max ()) 
           print ( 'Ave  %18.3f '   %   values . mean ()) 
           print ( 'Min  %18.3f '   %   values . min ()) 
           print ( 'Std  %18.3f '   %   values . std ()) 

           Max                5.224 
           Ave                0.000 
           Min               - 5.649 
           Std                1.000 
           CPU   times :   user   88.9   ms ,   sys :   70   ms ,   total :   159   ms 
           Wall   time :   156   ms 


 In   [ 157 ]:   %% time 
           res   =   [( row [ 'No1' ],   row [ 'No2' ])   for   row   in 
                   tab . where ( '((No1 > 9800) | (No1 < 200))  \ 
                           & ((No2 > 4500) & (No2 < 5500))' )] 

           CPU   times :   user   78.4   ms ,   sys :   38.9   ms ,   total :   117   ms 
           Wall   time :   80.9   ms 


 In   [ 158 ]:   for   r   in   res [: 4 ]: 
               print ( r ) 

           ( 91 ,   4870 ) 
           ( 9803 ,   5026 ) 
           ( 9846 ,   4859 ) 
           ( 9823 ,   5069 ) 


 In   [ 159 ]:   %% time 
           res   =   [( row [ 'No1' ],   row [ 'No2' ])   for   row   in 
                   tab . where ( '(No1 == 1234) & (No2 > 9776)' )] 

           CPU   times :   user   58.9   ms ,   sys :   40.1   ms ,   total :   99   ms 
           Wall   time :   133   ms 


 In   [ 160 ]:   for   r   in   res : 
               print ( r ) 

           ( 1234 ,   9841 ) 
           ( 1234 ,   9821 ) 
           ( 1234 ,   9867 ) 
           ( 1234 ,   9987 ) 
           ( 1234 ,   9849 ) 
           ( 1234 ,   9800 ) 
 













 
 Working with Compressed Tables 

 A major advantage of working with  PyTables  is the approach it takes to compression. It uses compression not only to save space on disk, but also to improve the performance of I/O operations in certain hardware scenarios. How does this work? When I/O is the bottleneck and the CPU is able to (de)compress data fast, the net effect of compression in terms of speed might be positive. Since the following examples are based on the I/O of a standard SSD, there is no speed advantage of compression to be observed. However, there is also almost no  disadvantage  of using compression: 

 In   [ 161 ] :   filename   =   path   +   ' pytabc.h5 ' 
 
 In   [ 162 ] :   h5c   =   tb . open_file ( filename ,   ' w ' ) 
 
 In   [ 163 ] :   filters   =   tb . Filters ( complevel = 5 ,    
                                 complib = ' blosc ' )    
 
 In   [ 164 ] :   tabc   =   h5c . create_table ( ' / ' ,   ' ints_floats ' ,   sarray , 
                                    title = ' Integers and Floats ' , 
                                    expectedrows = rows ,   filters = filters ) 
 
 In   [ 165 ] :   query   =   ' ((No3 < -0.5) | (No3 > 0.5)) & ((No4 < -1) | (No4 > 1)) ' 
 
 In   [ 166 ] :   iteratorc   =   tabc . where ( query )    
 
 In   [ 167 ] :   % time   res   =   [ ( row [ ' No3 ' ] ,   row [ ' No4 ' ] )   for   row   in   iteratorc ]    
 
            CPU   times :   user   362   ms ,   sys :   55.3   ms ,   total :   418   ms 
            Wall   time :   445   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 168 ] :   res   =   np . array ( res ) 
            res [ : 3 ] 
 Out [ 168 ] :   array ( [ [   0.7694 ,    1.4866 ] , 
                   [   0.9201 ,    1.3346 ] , 
                   [   1.4701 ,    1.8776 ] ] ) 
 
 
 The compression level ( complevel ) can take values between 0 (no compression) and 9 (highest compression). 
 
 The  Blosc  compression engine is used, which is optimized for performance. 
 
 The iterator object given the query from before. 
 
 The rows resulting from the query are collected via a list comprehension. 
 

 Generating the compressed  Table  object with the original data and doing analytics on it is slightly slower compared to the uncompressed  Table  object. What about reading the data into a  ndarray  object? Let’s check: 

 In   [ 169 ] :   % time   arr_non   =   tab . read ( )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   42.9   ms ,   sys :   69.9   ms ,   total :   113   ms 
            Wall   time :   117   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 170 ] :   tab . size_on_disk 
 Out [ 170 ] :   100122200 
 
 In   [ 171 ] :   arr_non . nbytes 
 Out [ 171 ] :   100000000 
 
 In   [ 172 ] :   % time   arr_com   =   tabc . read ( )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   123   ms ,   sys :   60.5   ms ,   total :   184   ms 
            Wall   time :   191   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 173 ] :   tabc . size_on_disk 
 Out [ 173 ] :   40612465 
 
 In   [ 174 ] :   arr_com . nbytes 
 Out [ 174 ] :   100000000 
 
 In   [ 175 ] :   ll   $ path *    
 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    200312336   Jan   18   10 : 06   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / pytab . h5 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff     40647761   Jan   18   10 : 06   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / pytabc . h5 
 
 
 In   [ 176 ] :   h5c . close ( )    
 
 
 Reading from the uncompressed  Table  object  tab . 
 
 Reading from the compressed  Table  object  tabc . 
 
 The size of the compressed table is significantly reduced. 
 
 Closing the database file. 
 

 The examples show that there is hardly a speed difference when working with compressed  Table  objects as compared to uncompressed ones. However, file sizes on disk might — depending on the quality of the data — significantly reduced which has a number of benefits: 

 
 
 storage costs : storage costs are reduced 
 
 
 backup costs : backup costs are reduced 
 
 
 network traffic : network traffic is reduced 
 
 
 network speed : storage on and retrieval from remote servers are faster 
 
 
 CPU utilization : CPU utilization is increased to overcome I/O bottlenecks 
 
 
 













 
 Working with Arrays 

 “Basic I/O with Python”  demonstrates that  NumPy  has built-in fast writing and reading capabilities for  ndarray  objects.  PyTables  is also quite fast and efficient when it comes to storing and retrieving  ndarray  objects. Since it is based on a hierarchical database structure, many convenience features come on top: 

 In   [ 177 ] :   % % time 
            arr_int   =   h5 . create_array ( ' / ' ,   ' integers ' ,   ran_int )    
            arr_flo   =   h5 . create_array ( ' / ' ,   ' floats ' ,   ran_flo )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   3.24   ms ,   sys :   33.1   ms ,   total :   36.3   ms 
            Wall   time :   41.6   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 178 ] :   h5    
 Out [ 178 ] :   File ( filename = / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / pytab . h5 ,   title = ' ' ,   mode = ' w ' ,   root_uep = ' / ' ,   filters = Filters ( complevel = 0 ,   shuffle = False ,   bitshuffle = False ,   fletcher32 = False ,   least_significant_digit = None ) ) 
            /   ( RootGroup )   ' ' 
            / floats   ( Array ( 2000000 ,   2 ) )   ' ' 
              atom   : =   Float64Atom ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ) 
              maindim   : =   0 
              flavor   : =   ' numpy ' 
              byteorder   : =   ' little ' 
              chunkshape   : =   None 
            / integers   ( Array ( 2000000 ,   2 ) )   ' ' 
              atom   : =   Int64Atom ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ) 
              maindim   : =   0 
              flavor   : =   ' numpy ' 
              byteorder   : =   ' little ' 
              chunkshape   : =   None 
            / ints_floats   ( Table ( 2000000 , ) )   ' Integers and Floats ' 
              description   : =   { 
              " Date " :   StringCol ( itemsize = 26 ,   shape = ( ) ,   dflt = b ' ' ,   pos = 0 ) , 
              " No1 " :   Int32Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ,   pos = 1 ) , 
              " No2 " :   Int32Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0 ,   pos = 2 ) , 
              " No3 " :   Float64Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ,   pos = 3 ) , 
              " No4 " :   Float64Col ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ,   pos = 4 ) } 
              byteorder   : =   ' little ' 
              chunkshape   : =   ( 2621 , ) 
 
 In   [ 179 ] :   ll   $ path * 
 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff    262344490   Jan   18   10 : 06   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / pytab . h5 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   yves    staff     40647761   Jan   18   10 : 06   / Users / yves / Documents / Temp / data / pytabc . h5 
 
 
 In   [ 180 ] :   h5 . close ( ) 
 
 In   [ 181 ] :   ! rm   - f   $ path * 
 
 
 Stores the  ran_int   ndarray  object. 
 
 Stores the  ran_flo   ndarray  object. 
 
 The changes are reflected in the object description. 
 

 Writing these objects directly to a  HDF5  database is faster than looping over the objects and writing the data row-by-row to a  Table  object or using the approach via structured  ndarray  objects. 
 HDF5-Based Data Storage 
 The  HDF5  hierarchical database (file) format is a powerful alternative to, for example, relational databases when it comes to structured numerical and financial data. Both on a standalone basis when using  PyTables  directly and when combining it with the capabilities of  pandas , you can expect to get almost the maximum I/O performance that the available hardware allows. 
 
 













 
 Out-of-Memory Computations 

 PyTables  supports out-of-memory operations, which makes it possible to implement array-based computations that do not fit into the memory. To this end, consider the following code based on the  EArray  class. This type of object allows to be expanded in one dimension (row-wise) while the number columns (elements per row) needs to be fixed. 

 In   [ 182 ] :   filename   =   path   +   ' earray.h5 ' 
 
 In   [ 183 ] :   h5   =   tb . open_file ( filename ,   ' w ' ) 
 
 In   [ 184 ] :   n   =   500    
 
 In   [ 185 ] :   ear   =   h5 . create_earray ( ' / ' ,   ' ear ' ,    
                                  atom = tb . Float64Atom ( ) ,    
                                  shape = ( 0 ,   n ) )    
 
 In   [ 186 ] :   type ( ear ) 
 Out [ 186 ] :   tables . earray . EArray 
 
 In   [ 187 ] :   rand   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( n ,   n ) )    
            rand [ : 4 ,   : 4 ] 
 Out [ 187 ] :   array ( [ [ - 1.25983231 ,    1.11420699 ,    0.1667485   ,    0.7345676   ] , 
                   [ - 0.13785424 ,    1.22232417 ,    1.36303097 ,    0.13521042 ] , 
                   [   1.45487119 ,   - 1.47784078 ,    0.15027672 ,    0.86755989 ] , 
                   [ - 0.63519366 ,    0.1516327   ,   - 0.64939447 ,   - 0.45010975 ] ] ) 
 
 In   [ 188 ] :   % % time 
            for   _   in   range ( 750 ) : 
                ear . append ( rand )    
            ear . flush ( ) 
 
            CPU   times :   user   728   ms ,   sys :   1.11   s ,   total :   1.84   s 
            Wall   time :   2.03   s 
 
 
 In   [ 189 ] :   ear 
 Out [ 189 ] :   / ear   ( EArray ( 375000 ,   500 ) )   ' ' 
              atom   : =   Float64Atom ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ) 
              maindim   : =   0 
              flavor   : =   ' numpy ' 
              byteorder   : =   ' little ' 
              chunkshape   : =   ( 16 ,   500 ) 
 
 In   [ 190 ] :   ear . size_on_disk 
 Out [ 190 ] :   1500032000 
 
 
 This defines the fixed number of columns. 
 
 The path and technical name of the  EArray  object. 
 
 The atomic  dtype  object of the single values. 
 
 The shape for instantiation (no rows,  n  columns). 
 
 The  ndarray  object with the random numbers … 
 
 … that gets appended many times. 
 

 For out-of-memory computations, that do not lead to aggregations, another  EArray  object of same shape (size) is needed. PyTables+ has a special module to cope with numerical expressions efficiently. It is called  Expr  and is based on the numerical expression library  numexpr . The code that follows uses  Expr  to calculate the mathematical expression in  Equation 9-1  on the whole  EArray  object from before. 
 
 Equation 9-1.  Example mathematical expression 
 
   
     y 
     = 
     3 
     sin 
     
       ( 
       x 
       ) 
     
     + 
     
       
         | 
         x 
         | 
       
     
   
 
 

 The results are stored in the  out   EArray  object, the expression evaluation happens chunk-wise. 

 In   [ 191 ] :   out   =   h5 . create_earray ( ' / ' ,   ' out ' , 
                                  atom = tb . Float64Atom ( ) , 
                                  shape = ( 0 ,   n ) ) 
 
 In   [ 192 ] :   out . size_on_disk 
 Out [ 192 ] :   0 
 
 In   [ 193 ] :   expr   =   tb . Expr ( ' 3 * sin(ear) + sqrt(abs(ear)) ' )    
 
 In   [ 194 ] :   expr . set_output ( out ,   append_mode = True )    
 
 In   [ 195 ] :   % time   expr . eval ( )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   2.98   s ,   sys :   1.38   s ,   total :   4.36   s 
            Wall   time :   3.28   s 
 
 
 Out [ 195 ] :   / out   ( EArray ( 375000 ,   500 ) )   ' ' 
              atom   : =   Float64Atom ( shape = ( ) ,   dflt = 0.0 ) 
              maindim   : =   0 
              flavor   : =   ' numpy ' 
              byteorder   : =   ' little ' 
              chunkshape   : =   ( 16 ,   500 ) 
 
 In   [ 196 ] :   out . size_on_disk 
 Out [ 196 ] :   1500032000 
 
 In   [ 197 ] :   out [ 0 ,   : 10 ] 
 Out [ 197 ] :   array ( [ - 1.73369462 ,    3.74824436 ,    0.90627898 ,    2.86786818 ,    1.75424957 , 
                   - 0.91108973 ,   - 1.68313885 ,    1.29073295 ,   - 1.68665599 ,   - 1.71345309 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 198 ] :   % time   out_   =   out . read ( )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   879   ms ,   sys :   1.11   s ,   total :   1.99   s 
            Wall   time :   2.18   s 
 
 
 In   [ 199 ] :   out_ [ 0 ,   : 10 ] 
 Out [ 199 ] :   array ( [ - 1.73369462 ,    3.74824436 ,    0.90627898 ,    2.86786818 ,    1.75424957 , 
                   - 0.91108973 ,   - 1.68313885 ,    1.29073295 ,   - 1.68665599 ,   - 1.71345309 ] ) 
 
 
 This transforms a  str  object based expression to a  Expr  object. 
 
 This defines the output to be the  out   EArray  object. 
 
 This initiates the evaluation of the expression. 
 
 This reads the whole  EArray  into the memory. 
 

 Given that the whole operation takes place out-of-memory, it can be considered quite fast, in particular as it is executed on standard hardware. As a benchmark, the in-memory performance of the  numexpr  module (see also [Link to Come]) can be considered. It is faster, but not by a huge margin: 

 In   [ 200 ] :   import   numexpr   as   ne    
 
 In   [ 201 ] :   expr   =   ' 3 * sin(out_) + sqrt(abs(out_)) '    
 
 In   [ 202 ] :   ne . set_num_threads ( 1 )    
 Out [ 202 ] :   4 
 
 In   [ 203 ] :   % time   ne . evaluate ( expr ) [ 0 ,   : 10 ]    
 
            CPU   times :   user   1.72   s ,   sys :   529   ms ,   total :   2.25   s 
            Wall   time :   2.38   s 
 
 
 Out [ 203 ] :   array ( [ - 1.64358578 ,    0.22567882 ,    3.31363043 ,    2.50443549 ,    4.27413965 , 
                   - 1.41600606 ,   - 1.68373023 ,    4.01921805 ,   - 1.68117412 ,   - 1.66053597 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 204 ] :   ne . set_num_threads ( 4 )    
 Out [ 204 ] :   1 
 
 In   [ 205 ] :   % time   ne . evaluate ( expr ) [ 0 ,   : 10 ]    
 
            CPU   times :   user   2.29   s ,   sys :   804   ms ,   total :   3.09   s 
            Wall   time :   1.56   s 
 
 
 Out [ 205 ] :   array ( [ - 1.64358578 ,    0.22567882 ,    3.31363043 ,    2.50443549 ,    4.27413965 , 
                   - 1.41600606 ,   - 1.68373023 ,    4.01921805 ,   - 1.68117412 ,   - 1.66053597 ] ) 
 
 In   [ 206 ] :   h5 . close ( ) 
 
 In   [ 207 ] :   ! rm   - f   $ path * 
 
 
 Import the module for  in-memory  evaluations of numerical expressions. 
 
 The numerical expression as a  str  object. 
 
 Sets the number of threads to be one only. 
 
 Evaluates the numerical expression in-memory with one thread. 
 
 Sets the number of threads to be four. 
 
 Evaluates the numerical expression in-memory with four threads. 
 
 





 













 
 I/O with TsTables 

 The package  TsTables  uses  PyTables  to build a high performance storage for time series data. The major usage scenario is " write once, retrieve multiple times “. This is a typical scenario in financial analytics since data is created in the markets, retrieved maybe in real-time or asynchronously and stored on disk for later usage. Such usage might be a larger trading strategy backtesting program that requires different sub-sets of a historical financial time series over and over again. It is then important that data retrieval happens fast. 








 
 Sample Data 

 As usual, first the generation of some sample data set that is large enough to illustrate the benefits of  TsTables . The following code generates three rather long financial time series based on the simulation of a geometric Brownian motion (see [Link to Come]). 

 In   [ 208 ] :   no   =   5000000    
            co   =   3    
            interval   =   1.   /   ( 12   *   30   *   24   *   60 )    
            vol   =   0.2    
 
 In   [ 209 ] :   % % time 
            rn   =   np . random . standard_normal ( ( no ,   co ) )    
            rn [ 0 ]   =   0.0    
            paths   =   100   *   np . exp ( np . cumsum ( - 0.5   *   vol   * *   2   *   interval   + 
                    vol   *   np . sqrt ( interval )   *   rn ,   axis = 0 ) )    
            paths [ 0 ]   =   100    
 
            CPU   times :   user   932   ms ,   sys :   204   ms ,   total :   1.14   s 
            Wall   time :   1.2   s 
 
 
 The number of time steps. 
 
 The number of time series. 
 
 The time interval as a year fraction. 
 
 The volatility. 
 
 Standard-normally distributed random numbers. 
 
 The initial random numbers set to 0. 
 
 The simulation based on a Euler discretization. 
 
 The initial values of the paths set to 100. 
 

 Since  TsTables  works pretty well with  pandas   DataFrame  objects, the data is transformed to such an object (see also  Figure 9-7 ). 

 In   [ 210 ]:   dr   =   pd . date_range ( '2019-1-1' ,   periods = no ,   freq = '1s' ) 

 In   [ 211 ]:   dr [ - 6 :] 
 Out [ 211 ]:   DatetimeIndex ([ '2019-02-27 20:53:14' ,   '2019-02-27 20:53:15' , 
                          '2019-02-27 20:53:16' ,   '2019-02-27 20:53:17' , 
                          '2019-02-27 20:53:18' ,   '2019-02-27 20:53:19' ], 
                         dtype = 'datetime64[ns]' ,   freq = 'S' ) 

 In   [ 212 ]:   df   =   pd . DataFrame ( paths ,   index = dr ,   columns = [ 'ts1' ,   'ts2' ,   'ts3' ]) 

 In   [ 213 ]:   df . info () 

           < class   ' pandas . core . frame . DataFrame '> 
           DatetimeIndex :   5000000   entries ,   2019 - 01 - 01   00 : 00 : 00   to   2019 - 02 - 27   20 : 53 : 19 
           Freq :   S 
           Data   columns   ( total   3   columns ): 
           ts1      float64 
           ts2      float64 
           ts3      float64 
           dtypes :   float64 ( 3 ) 
           memory   usage :   152.6   MB 


 In   [ 214 ]:   df . head () 
 Out [ 214 ]:                               ts1           ts2           ts3 
           2019 - 01 - 01   00 : 00 : 00    100.000000    100.000000    100.000000 
           2019 - 01 - 01   00 : 00 : 01    100.018443     99.966644     99.998255 
           2019 - 01 - 01   00 : 00 : 02    100.069023    100.004420     99.986646 
           2019 - 01 - 01   00 : 00 : 03    100.086757    100.000246     99.992042 
           2019 - 01 - 01   00 : 00 : 04    100.105448    100.036033     99.950618 

 In   [ 215 ]:   df [:: 100000 ] . plot ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 )); 
           plt . savefig ( '../../images/ch09/io_07.png' ) 

 
 
 Figure 9-7.  Selected data points of the financial time series 
 
 













 
 Data Storage 

 TsTables  stores financial time series data based on a specific chunk-based structure which allows for fast data retrieval of arbitrary data sub-sets defined by some time interval. To this end, the package adds the function  create_ts()  to  PyTables . The following code uses the  class  based description method from  PyTables , based on the  tb.IsDescription  class. 

 In   [ 216 ] :   import   tstables   as   tstab 
 
 In   [ 217 ] :   class   ts_desc ( tb . IsDescription ) : 
                timestamp   =   tb . Int64Col ( pos = 0 )    
                ts1   =   tb . Float64Col ( pos = 1 )    
                ts2   =   tb . Float64Col ( pos = 2 )    
                ts3   =   tb . Float64Col ( pos = 3 )    
 
 In   [ 218 ] :   h5   =   tb . open_file ( path   +   ' tstab.h5 ' ,   ' w ' )    
 
 In   [ 219 ] :   ts   =   h5 . create_ts ( ' / ' ,   ' ts ' ,   ts_desc )    
 
 In   [ 220 ] :   % time   ts . append ( df )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   692   ms ,   sys :   403   ms ,   total :   1.1   s 
            Wall   time :   1.12   s 
 
 
 In   [ 221 ] :   type ( ts ) 
 Out [ 221 ] :   tstables . tstable . TsTable 
 
 In   [ 222 ] :   ls   - n   $ path 
 
            total   306720 
            - rw - r - - r - -    1   501    20    157037368   Jan   18   10 : 07   tstab . h5 
 
 
 The column for the time stamps. 
 
 The columns to store the numerical data. 
 
 Opens a  HDF5  database file for writing ( w ). 
 
 Creates the  TsTable  object based on the  ts_desc  object. 
 
 Appends the data from the  DataFrame  object to the  TsTable  object. 
 
 













 
 Data Retrieval 

 Writing data with  TsTables  obviously is quite fast, even if hardware-dependent. The same holds true for reading chunks of the data back into memory. Conveniently,  TaTables  returns a  DataFrame  object (see also  Figure 9-8 ). 

 In   [ 223 ] :   read_start_dt   =   dt . datetime ( 2019 ,   2 ,   1 ,   0 ,   0 )    
            read_end_dt   =   dt . datetime ( 2019 ,   2 ,   5 ,   23 ,   59 )    
 
 In   [ 224 ] :   % time   rows   =   ts . read_range ( read_start_dt ,   read_end_dt )    
 
            CPU   times :   user   80.5   ms ,   sys :   36.2   ms ,   total :   117   ms 
            Wall   time :   116   ms 
 
 
 In   [ 225 ] :   rows . info ( )    
 
            < class   ' pandas . core . frame . DataFrame ' > 
            DatetimeIndex :   431941   entries ,   2019 - 02 - 01   00 : 00 : 00   to   2019 - 02 - 05   23 : 59 : 00 
            Data   columns   ( total   3   columns ) : 
            ts1      431941   non - null   float64 
            ts2      431941   non - null   float64 
            ts3      431941   non - null   float64 
            dtypes :   float64 ( 3 ) 
            memory   usage :   13.2   MB 
 
 
 In   [ 226 ] :   rows . head ( )    
 Out [ 226 ] :                              ts1          ts2           ts3 
            2019 - 02 - 01   00 : 00 : 00    52.063640    40.474580    217.324713 
            2019 - 02 - 01   00 : 00 : 01    52.087455    40.471911    217.250070 
            2019 - 02 - 01   00 : 00 : 02    52.084808    40.458013    217.228712 
            2019 - 02 - 01   00 : 00 : 03    52.073536    40.451408    217.302912 
            2019 - 02 - 01   00 : 00 : 04    52.056133    40.450951    217.207481 
 
 In   [ 227 ] :   h5 . close ( ) 
 
 In   [ 228 ] :   ( rows [ : : 500 ]   /   rows . iloc [ 0 ] ) . plot ( figsize = ( 10 ,   6 ) ) ; 
            plt . savefig ( ' ../../images/ch09/io_08.png ' ) 
 
 
 The start time of the interval. 
 
 The end time of the interval. 
 
 The function  ts.read_range()  returns a  DataFrame  object for the interval. 
 
 The  DataFrame  object has a few 100,000 data rows. 
 

 
 
 Figure 9-8.  A specific time interval of the financial time series (normalized) 
 

 To better illustrate the performance of the  TsTables  based data retrieval, consider the following benchmark which retrieves 100 chunks of data consisting of three days worth of one-second bars. The retrieval of a  DataFrame  with 345,600 rows of data takes less than one tenth of a second. 

 In   [ 229 ] :   import   random 
 
 In   [ 230 ] :   h5   =   tb . open_file ( path   +   ' tstab.h5 ' ,   ' r ' ) 
 
 In   [ 231 ] :   ts   =   h5 . root . ts . _f_get_timeseries ( )    
 
 In   [ 235 ] :   % % time 
            for   _   in   range ( 100 ) :    
                d   =   random . randint ( 1 ,   24 )    
                read_start_dt   =   dt . datetime ( 2019 ,   2 ,   d ,   0 ,   0 ,   0 ) 
                read_end_dt   =   dt . datetime ( 2019 ,   2 ,   d   +   3 ,   23 ,   59 ,   59 ) 
                rows   =   ts . read_range ( read_start_dt ,   read_end_dt ) 
 
            CPU   times :   user   3.51   s ,   sys :   1.03   s ,   total :   4.55   s 
            Wall   time :   4.62   s 
 
 
 In   [ 233 ] :   rows . info ( )    
 
            < class   ' pandas . core . frame . DataFrame ' > 
            DatetimeIndex :   431941   entries ,   2019 - 02 - 01   00 : 00 : 00   to   2019 - 02 - 05   23 : 59 : 00 
            Data   columns   ( total   3   columns ) : 
            ts1      431941   non - null   float64 
            ts2      431941   non - null   float64 
            ts3      431941   non - null   float64 
            dtypes :   float64 ( 3 ) 
            memory   usage :   13.2   MB 
 
 
 In   [ 234 ] :   ! rm   $ path / tstab . h5 
 
 
 This connects to the  TsTable  object. 
 
 The data retrieval is repeated many times. 
 
 The starting day value is randomized. 
 
 The last  DataFrame  object retrieved. 
 
 





 













 
 Conclusions 

 SQL -based or relational databases have advantages when it comes to complex data structures that exhibit lots of relations between single objects/tables. This might justify in some circumstances their performance disadvantage over pure  NumPy   ndarray -based or  pandas   DataFrame -based approaches. 

 Many application areas in finance or science in general, can succeed with a mainly array-based data modeling approach. In these cases, huge performance improvements can be realized by making use of native  NumPy  I/O capabilities, a combination of  NumPy  and  PyTables  capabilities, or of the  pandas  approach via  HDF5 -based stores.  TsTables  is particularly useful when working with large (financial) time series data sets, in particular in " write once, retrieve multiple times " scenarios. 

 While a recent trend has been to use cloud-based solutions—where the cloud is made up of a large number of computing nodes based on commodity hardware—one should carefully consider, especially in a financial context, which hardware architecture best serves the analytics requirements. A study by Microsoft sheds some light on this topic: 
 
 We claim that a single " scale-up " server can process each of these jobs and do as well or better than a cluster in terms of performance, cost, power, and server density. 
 Appuswamy et al. (2013) 
 

 Companies, research institutions, and others involved in data analytics should therefore analyze first what specific tasks have to be accomplished in general and then decide on the hardware/software architecture, in terms of: 
 
 Scaling out 
 
 Using a cluster with many commodity nodes with standard CPUs and relatively low memory 
 
 Scaling up 
 
 Using one or a few powerful servers with many-core CPUs — possibly also GPUs or even TPUs when machine and deep learning play a role — and large amounts of memory. 
 
 

 Scaling up hardware and applying appropriate implementation approaches might significantly influence performance. More on performance in the next chapter. 
 













 
 Further Reading 

 The paper cited at the beginning of the chapter as well as in  “Conclusions”  section is a good read, and a good starting point to think about hardware architecture for financial analytics: 

 
 
 Appuswamy, Raja et al. (2013): " Nobody Ever Got Fired for Buying a Cluster. " Microsoft Research, Cambridge, England,  http://research.microsoft.com/apps/pubs/default.aspx?id=179615 . 
 
 

 As usual, the Web provides many valuable resources with regard to the topics covered in this chapter: 

 
 
 For serialization of Python objects with  pickle , refer to the documentation:  http://docs.python.org/3/library/pickle.html . 
 
 
 An overview of the I/O capabilities of  NumPy  is provided on the  SciPy  website:  http://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/routines.io.html . 
 
 
 For I/O with  pandas  see the respective section in the online documentation:  http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/io.html . 
 
 
 The  PyTables  home page provides both tutorials and detailed documentation:  http://www.pytables.org . 
 
 
 The Github page of  TsTables  is found under  https://github.com/afiedler/tstables . 
 
 
 







 1  Here, we do not distinguish between different levels of RAM and processor caches. The optimal use of current memory architectures is a topic in itself. 2  For an overview of available database connectors for Python, visit  https://wiki.python.org/moin/DatabaseInterfaces . Instead of working directly with relational databases, object relational mappers, such as  SQLAlchemy , prove often useful. They introduce an abstraction layer that allows for more Pythonic, object-oriented code. They also allow to more easily to exchange one relational database for another in the back end. 3  See  https://www.sqlite.org/lang.html  for an overview of the  SQLite3  language dialect. 4  See  http://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/arrays.datetime.html . 5  Many other databases require a server-client architechture. For interactive data and financial analytics, file-based databases prove a bit more convenient and also sufficient for most purposes in general. 
 
 



 
 
   
   

   About the Author 

     Dr. Yves J. Hilpisch is founder and managing partner of The Python Quants ( http://tpq.io ), a group focusing on the use of open source technologies for financial data science, artificial intelligence, algorithmic trading and computational finance. He is the author of the books ( http://books.tpq.io ): 

     
         Derivatives Analytics with Python (Wiley, 2015) 
         Listed Volatility and Variance Derivatives (Wiley, 2017). 
     

     Yves lectures on computational finance at the CQF Program ( http://cqf.com ), on algorithmic trading at the EPAT Program ( http://quantinsti.com ) and on data science at htw saar University of Applied Sciences ( http://htwsaar.de ). He is also the director of the first online training program leading to a University Certificate in Python for Algorithmic Trading ( http://certificate.tpq.io ). 

     Yves has written the financial analytics library DX Analytics ( http://dx-analytics.com ) and organizes meetups, conferences and bootcamps about Python for quantitative finance in London, Frankfurt, Berlin, Paris and New York ( http://pqf.tpq.io ,  http://fpq.io ). He has given keynote speeches at technology conferences in the United States, Europe and Asia. 

 
 
 
