

Empirical Market Microstructure


This page intentionally left blank 


Empirical Market Microstructure
The Institutions, Economics, and Econometrics
of Securities Trading
Joel Hasbrouck
1
2007


1
Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further
Oxford University’s objective of excellence
in research, scholarship, and education.
Oxford New York
Auckland
Cape Town
Dar es Salaam
Hong Kong
Karachi
Kuala Lumpur
Madrid
Melbourne
Mexico City
Nairobi
New Delhi
Shanghai
Taipei
Toronto
With ofﬁces in
Argentina
Austria
Brazil
Chile
Czech Republic
France
Greece
Guatemala
Hungary
Italy
Japan
Poland
Portugal
Singapore
South Korea
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey
Ukraine
Vietnam
Copyright © 2007 by Oxford University Press
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
www.oup.com
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hasbrouck, Joel.
Empirical market microstructure: the institutions, economics, and
econometrics of securities trading/Joel Hasbrouck.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-19-530164-9
ISBN: 0-19-530164-1
1. Securities. 2. Securities—Prices. 3. Investments—Mathematical models.
4. Stock exchanges—Mathematical models. I. Title.
HG4521.H353 2007
332.64—dc22
2006003935
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper


To Lisa, who inspires these pages and much more.


This page intentionally left blank 


Preface
This book is a study of the trading mechanisms in ﬁnancial markets: the
institutions, the economic principles underlying the institutions, and sta-
tistical models for analyzing the data they generate. The book is aimed
at graduate and advanced undergraduate students in ﬁnancial economics
and practitioners who design or use order management systems. Most
of the book presupposes only a basic familiarity with economics and
statistics.
I began writing this book because I perceived a need for treatment of
empirical market microstructure that was uniﬁed, authoritative, and com-
prehensive. The need still exists, and perhaps someday when the ﬁeld has
reached a point of perfection and stasis such a book will be written. In the
meantime I simply endeavor to identify and illuminate some themes that
appear, for the moment at least, to be deﬁning the ﬁeld’s arc of progress.
Three of these themes are especially prominent. The ﬁrst is the institu-
tion that has come to dominate many of our most important markets—the
(electronic) limit order book. Much of the material here can be perceived
as an attempt to understand this mechanism. The second theme is asym-
metric information, an economic term that refers to the varying quality
of the information that traders bring to the market. It often establishes a
motive for trade by some individuals, but also frequently leads to costs
borne by a larger number. The third theme is linear time-series ana-
lysis, a set of statistical tools that have proven to be robust and useful
not simply in describing security market data but also in characterizing
the underlying economic structure.
Although the institutional, economic, and statistical content of the
book can be read separately and selectively, there is a natural ordering to
these perspectives. The features of real-world trading mechanisms moti-
vate almost everything else, so an early chapter provides an accessible
summary that is largely self-contained. Once this framework has been
established, the economic arguments that follow will seem more focused.
The statistical time-series models are then brought in to support, refute,
or calibrate the economic analyses.
The discussion of time-series analysis here is not as deep as a text-
book focused solely on the subject, but it is more substantial than
an applied ﬁeld book would normally attempt. I weave through the
book coherent and self-contained explanations of the time-series basics.


viii
PREFACE
This is not done simply to save the reader the trouble of reaching for one
of the texts. Coverage, sequencing, and balance in most statistics texts
are driven (implicitly at least) by the nature of the data to be modeled. It
is a fact that most applications and illustrations in the extant literature
of time-series econometrics are drawn from macroeconomics. A theo-
rem is a theorem, of course, irrespective of the sampling frequency. But
microstructure data and models are distinctive. It is my hope that seeing
time-series analysis organized from a microstructure perspective will help
readers apply it to microstructure problems.
Although not presently afﬁliated, I have over the years served as paid or
unpaid consultant or advisor to the New York Stock Exchange, NASDAQ,
the Securities and Exchange Commission, and ITG. Except for a brief
youthful adventure as a day trader, I lay no claim to trading experience.
One of the earliest comprehensive analyses of U.S. equity markets was
the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Special Study of Securities
Markets (1963). Irwin Friend was a consultant to that study and later,
among many other things, my dissertation advisor. His supervision was
an ongoing lesson in how to approach data with a balance of imagination
and skepticism.
All students of market microstructure owe a large debt to the practition-
ers, who over the years have shared data, patiently described the workings
of their markets, and helped us deﬁne the important and relevant prob-
lems. Jim Cochrane (then of the New York Stock Exchange) opened the
door of the exchange to academics, correctly foreseeing that both groups
would gain enormously. His efforts have had an enduring positive effect
on the research culture of the ﬁeld.
Other practitioners and regulators who have helped bring us to where
we are today include Robert Colby, Michael Edleson, Robert Fersten-
berg, Dean Furbush, Frank Hatheway, Rick Ketchum, Ray Killian, Martha
Kramer, Tim McCormick, Annette Nazareth, Richard Olsen, Jim Shapiro,
James Sinclair, George Soﬁanos, and David Whitcomb. To these individ-
uals I offer my thanks in lieu of citations.
A partial list of academic researchers who have shaped my thinking
and this book would include Yakov Amihud, Bruno Biais, Ian Domowitz,
David Easley, Rob Engle, Larry Glosten, Yasushi Hamao, Larry Harris, Tom
Ho, Charles Jones, A. S. (Pete) Kyle, Bruce Lehmann, Andrew Lo, Francis
Longstaff, Richard Lyons, Ananth Madhavan, Maureen O’Hara, Chris-
tine Parlour, Lasse Pedersen, Mark Ready, Gideon Saar, Robert Schwartz,
Duane Seppi, Erik Sirri, Matt Spiegel, Chester Spatt, Hans Stoll, Avanid-
har (Subra) Subramanyam, S. (Vish) Viswanathan, Jiang Wang, Ingrid
Werner, and many others. For encouragement and editorial assistance,
I am grateful to Kim Hoag, Catherine Rae, and Terry Vaughn.
I am grateful to the Stern School of New York University for sabbat-
ical support that sustained this work, and to Kenneth G. Langone, who
endowed the professorship at Stern that I currently hold. The Business
School of Columbia University graciously hosted me as a visitor during
the very pleasant year in which this book was completed.
For their suffusion of curiosity, creativity and ebullience, I thank my
daughters, Ariane and Siena Hasbrouck.


Contents
1.
Introduction
3
2.
Trading Mechanisms
9
3.
The Roll Model of Trade Prices
23
4.
Univariate Time-Series Analysis
31
5.
Sequential Trade Models
42
6.
Order Flow and the Probability of Informed Trading
56
7.
Strategic Trade Models
61
8.
A Generalized Roll Model
67
9.
Multivariate Linear Microstructure Models
78
10.
Multiple Securities and Multiple Prices
94
11.
Dealers and Their Inventories
106
12.
Limit Order Markets
118
13.
Depth
131
14.
Trading Costs: Retrospective and Comparative
143
15.
Prospective Trading Costs and Execution Strategies
153
Appendix: U.S. Equity Markets
166
Notes
179
References
183
Index
196
ix


This page intentionally left blank 


Empirical Market Microstructure


This page intentionally left blank 


1
Introduction
1.1
Overview
Market microstructure is the study of the trading mechanisms used for
ﬁnancial securities. There is no “microstructure manifesto,” and historical
antecedents to the ﬁeld can probably be found going back to the begin-
ning of written language, but at some point, the ﬁeld acquired a distinct
identity. As good a starting point as any is the coinage of the term market
microstructure in the paper of the same title by Garman (1976):
We depart from the usual approaches of the theory of exchange
by (1) making the assumption of asynchronous, temporally dis-
crete market activities on the part of market agents and (2) adopt-
ing a viewpoint which treats the temporal microstructure, i.e.,
moment-to-moment aggregate exchange behavior, as an important
descriptive aspect of such markets. (p. 257)
Microstructure analyses typically touch on one or more of the following
aspects of trade.
1.1.1
Sources of Value and Reasons for Trade
We generally assume that the security value comprises private and com-
mon components. Private values are idiosyncratic to the agent and are
usually known by the agent when the trading strategy is decided. Com-
mon values are the same for everyone in the market and are often known
or realized only after trade has occurred. In security markets, the common
value component reﬂects the cash ﬂows from the security, as summarized
3


4
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
in the present value of the ﬂows or the security’s resale value. Private value
components arise from differences in investment horizon, risk exposure,
endowments, tax situations, and so on. Generally, common value effects
dominate private value effects. A necessary condition for gains from trade
within a set of agents is contingent on some sort of differentiation. In
modeling, this is often introduced as heterogeneous private values.
1.1.2
Mechanisms in Economic Settings
Microstructure analyses are usually very speciﬁc about the mechanism or
protocol used to accomplish trade. One common and important mecha-
nism is the continuous limit order market. The full range, though, includes
search, bargaining, auctions, dealer markets, and a variety of derivative
markets. These mechanisms may operate in parallel: Many markets are
hybrids.
1.1.3
Multiple Characterizations of Prices
The market-clearing price, at least at it arises in usual Walrasian taton-
nement, rarely appears in microstructure analyses. At a single instant
there may be many prices, depending on direction (buying or selling),
the speed with which the trade must be accomplished, the agent’s iden-
tity or other attribute, and the agent’s relationship to the counterparty (as
well as, of course, quantity). Some prices (like bids and offers) may be
hypothetical and prospective.
1.2
Liquidity
Security markets are sometimes characterized by their liquidity. Precise
deﬁnitions only exist in the contexts of particular models, but the qualities
associated with the word are sufﬁciently widely accepted and understood
that the term is useful in practical and academic discourse.
Liquidity impounds the usual economic concept of elasticity. In a liq-
uid market, a small shift in demand or supply does not result in a large
price change. Liquidity also refers to the cost of trading, something dis-
tinct from the price of the security being bought or sold. Liquid markets
have low trading costs. Finally, liquidity has dynamic attributes. In a liq-
uid market, accomplishing a purchase or sale over a short horizon does
not cost appreciably more than spreading the trades over a longer interval.
Liquidity is sometimes deﬁned as “depth, breadth, and resiliency.” In
a deep market if we look a little above the current market price, there is
a large incremental quantity available for sale. Below the current price,
there is a large incremental quantity that is sought by one or more buyers.
A broad market has many participants, none of whom is presumed to


INTRODUCTION
5
exert signiﬁcant market power. In a resilient market, the price effects that
are associated with the trading process (as opposed to the fundamental
valuations) are small and die out quickly.
It is sometimes useful to characterize agents as suppliers or demanders
of liquidity. Liquidity supply has traditionally been associated with the
ﬁnancial services industry, that is, the brokers, dealers, and other inter-
mediaries that are sometimes called the sell side of the market. Liquidity
demanders in this view are the customers, the individual and institu-
tional investors characterized by trading needs (and sometimes called the
buy side).
From a narrower perspective, liquidity supply and demand differenti-
ates agents who are available to trade or offer the option to trade, and those
who spontaneously decide to trade. Thus, liquidity suppliers are passive,
and demanders are active. In any particular trade, the active side is the
party who seals the deal by accepting the terms offered by the passive
side. In other words, the passive side “makes” the market and the active
side “takes.”
With the rise of markets that are widely, directly, and electroni-
cally accessible, the role of liquidity demander or supplier (in the sense
of the preceding paragraph) is a strategic choice that can be quickly
reversed. The alignment of liquidity demand and supply with particu-
lar institutions, therefore, is of diminished relevance in many modern
markets.
The liquidity externality is a network externality. The attributes of
liquidity just discussed are generally enhanced, and individual agents
can trade at lower cost, when the number of participants increases. This
force favors market consolidation, the concentration of trading activity
in a single mechanism or venue. Differences in market participants (e.g.,
retail versus institutional investors), however, and innovations by market
designers militate in favor of market segmentation (in this context, usually
called fragmentation).
The number of participants in a security market obviously depends on
features of the security, in addition to the trading mechanism. If the aggre-
gate value of the underlying assets is high; if value-relevant information is
comprehensive, uniform, and credible; or if the security is a component
of an important index, there will be high interest in trading the security.
Ultimately, of course, these qualities are determined endogenously with
the market mechanism. But it is common, when emphasizing the exoge-
nous aspects of these attributes to describe a security as being liquid or
illiquid.
The sources and origins of liquidity are generally what this book and
the ﬁeld are about. They defy simplistic generalizations, but I have found
one expression to be particularly thought-provoking: “Liquidity is cre-
ated through a give and take process in which multiple counterparties
selectively reveal information in exchange for information ultimately


6
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
leading to a trade.” The words are taken from the offering materials for
the ICor Brokerage (an electronic swaps trading platform). It is a practical
sentiment that resonates throughout much of what follows.
1.3
Transparency
Transparency is a market attribute that refers to how much information
market participants (and potential participants) possess about the trading
process. Electronic markets that communicate in real time the bids and
offers of buyers and sellers and the prices of executed trades are consid-
ered highly transparent. Dealer markets, on the other hand, often have no
publicly visible bids or offers, nor any trade reporting, and are therefore
usually considered opaque.
1.4
Econometric Issues
Microstructure data are distinctive. Most microstructure series consist of
discrete events randomly arranged in continuous time. Within the time-
series taxonomy, they are formally classiﬁed as point processes. Point
process characterizations are becomingly increasingly important, but for
many purposes it sufﬁces to treat observations as continuous variables
realized at regular discrete times.
Microstructure data are often well ordered. The sequence of observa-
tions in the data set closely corresponds to the sequence in which the eco-
nomic events actually happened. In contrast, most macroeconomic data
are time-aggregated. This gives rise to simultaneity and uncertainty about
the directions of causal effects. The ﬁne temporal resolution, sometimes
described as ultra-high frequency, often supports stronger conclusions
about causality (at least in the post hoc ergo propter hoc sense).
Microstructure data samples are typically large in the sense that by
most economic standards observations are exceedingly plentiful (10,000
would not be considered unusual). One would not ordinarily question the
validity of asymptotic statistical approximations in samples of this size. It
is worth emphasizing, though, that the usual asymptotic results apply to
correctly speciﬁed models, and given the complexity of trading processes,
some degree of misspeciﬁcation is almost inevitable. Furthermore, despite
the number of observations, the data samples are often small in terms of
calendar span (on the order of days or at best months).
Microstructure data samples are new (we don’t have long-term his-
torical data for most markets). The samples may also be characterized as
old, though, because market institutions are changing so rapidly that even
samples a few years previous may be seriously out of date.


INTRODUCTION
7
1.5
The Questions
Here is a partial list of signiﬁcant outstanding questions in market
microstructure:
• What are optimal trading strategies for typical trading problems?
• Exactly how is information impounded in prices?
• How do we enhance the information aggregation process?
• How do we avoid market failures?
• What sort of trading arrangements maximize efﬁciency?
• What is the trade-off between “fairness” and efﬁciency?
• How is market structure related to the valuation of securities?
• What can market/trading data tell us about the informational
environment of the ﬁrm?
• What can market/trading data tell us about long-term risk?
Although they might have been worded differently, most of these prob-
lems have been outstanding as long as the ﬁeld has been in existence.
1.6
Readings
This book draws on material from economic theory, econometrics and
statistics, and descriptions of existing market institutions. Harris (2003)
is a broad treatment of economic theory and trading institutions at the
advanced MBA level. O’Hara (1995) is the standard reference for the eco-
nomic theory of market microstructure. Brunnermeier (2001) surveys
information and price formation in securities markets, treating micro-
structure in a broader economic context. Lyons (2001) discusses the
market microstructure of the foreign exchange market, providing a use-
ful alternative to the present treatment, which is based more on equity
markets. Survey articles include Hasbrouck (1996a), Madhavan (2000),
and Biais, Glosten, and Spatt (2005). Amihud, Mendelson, and Pedersen
(2005) survey the rapidly growing ﬁeld that links microstructure and asset
pricing. Shepard (2005) is a useful collection of key readings in stochastic
volatility. This research increasingly relies on high-frequency data and
therefore more deeply involves microstructure issues.
Some characteristics of security price dynamics are best discussed in
context of the larger environment in which the security market operates.
Cochrane (2005) is a comprehensive and highly comprehensible synthesis
of the economics of asset pricing. Related background readings on ﬁnan-
cial economics include Ingersoll (1987), Huang and Litzenberger (1998),
and Dufﬁe (2001).
The empirical material draws heavily on the econometrics of time-
series analysis. Hamilton (1994) is the key reference here, and the present
discussion often refers the reader to Hamilton for greater detail. For other


8
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
econometric techniques (in particular, duration and limited dependent
variable models), Greene (2002) is particularly useful. Alexander (2001),
Gourieroux and Jasiak (2001) and Tsay (2002) discuss ﬁnancial econo-
metrics; Dacorogna et al. (2001) focus on high-frequency data. The econo-
metric coverage in these excellent books partially overlaps with the
present text.
It is difﬁcult to cite authoritative sources covering institutional details
of the speciﬁc markets. Markets that are recently organized or over-
hauled, particularly those that feature standard mechanisms, are usually
well documented. The trading procedures of the Euronext markets are
in this respect exemplary (Euronext (2003)). Hybrid markets that have
evolved over extended periods of change and adaptation are much less
straightforward. The practicalities of current trading on the New York
Stock Exchange, for example, would be extremely difﬁcult to deduce from
the codiﬁed Constitution and Rules (New York Stock Exchange (2005)).
Comerton-Forde and Rydge (2004) provide useful summaries of trading
procedures in many securities markets and countries.
1.7
Supplements to the Book
My Web site (http://www.stern.nyu.edu/∼jhasbrou) contains a number
of links and programs that may help the reader follow, apply, emend, or
extend the material in the book. Most of the mathematical derivations in
the book were generated using Mathematica. The Mathematica notebooks
are available on the site. Using Mathematica does not by any means guar-
antee the correctness of a derivation, but it does lessen the likelihood of
a simple algebraic mistake. A Mathematica notebook documents a calcu-
lation in standard form. It facilitates the modiﬁcation and extension of an
argument, visualization, and (when necessary) the transition to numeri-
cal implementation. The solutions to most of the exercises are contained
in the notebooks. The site has several SAS programs that illustrate the
techniques.


2
Trading Mechanisms
This chapter surveys typical trading arrangements and establishes an
institutional context for the statistical and economic models to follow.
This book focuses on continuous security markets. Whatever their original
mechanisms, many and the most visible of these markets presently feature
an electronic limit order book. The limit order market, then, is the starting
point for the survey. This is probably the most important mechanism,
but there are usually at least several alternative paths to accomplishing a
trade for any given security. Most security markets are actually hybrids,
involving dealers, clearings, one- and two-sided auctions, and bilateral
bargaining, all of which are also discussed. The survey emphasizes general
features and is not speciﬁc to particular securities or a particular country.
The appendix to the book contains a supplementary overview of U.S.
equity markets.
Whatever the mechanism, the event that we label a trade, execution,
or ﬁll (of an order) actually only constitutes a preliminary agreement as
to terms. This agreement sets in motion the clearing and settlement pro-
cedures that will ultimately result in the transfer of securities and funds.
These processes are usually automatic and routine, and the traders sel-
dom need to concern themselves with the details. It is important, though,
that they require some sort of preexisting relationship, possibly one that is
indirect and via intermediaries, between the parties. Establishing a broker-
age account or clearing arrangement is neither costless nor instantaneous
and may therefore create a short-run barrier to entry for a potential buyer
or seller not previously known to the market.
Trading often involves a broker. A broker may simply provide a con-
duit to the market but may also act as the customer’s agent. This is a more
9


10
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
substantial role and may involve discretion about how to handle a cus-
tomer’s trading needs: when to trade, where to trade, what sort of orders
to use, and so on. The customer–broker agency relationship gives rise
to the usual problems of monitoring, contracting, and enforcement that
pervade many principal–agent relationships. The broker’s duty to the
customer is sometimes broadly characterized as “best execution,” but
precise deﬁnition of what this means has proven elusive (Macey and
O’Hara (1997)).
We now turn to the speciﬁc mechanisms.
2.1
Limit Order Markets
Most continuous security markets have at least one electronic limit order
book. A limit order is an order that speciﬁes a direction, quantity, and
acceptable price, for example, “Buy 200 shares at $25.50 [per share],” or
“Sell 300 shares at $30.00.” In a limit order market, orders arrive randomly
in time. The price limit of a newly arrived order is compared to those of
orders already held in the system to ascertain if there is a match. For
example, if the buy and sell orders just described were to enter the system
(in any order), there would be no match: a price of $25.50 is not acceptable
to the seller; a price of $30.00 is not acceptable to the buyer. A subsequent
order to buy 100 shares at $32.00 could be matched, however, as there is
an overlap in the acceptable prices. If there is a match, the trade occurs
at the price set by the ﬁrst order: An execution will take place (for 100
shares) at $30.
The set of unexecuted limit orders held by the system constitutes the
book. Because limit orders can be canceled or modiﬁed at any time, the
book is dynamic, and in active markets with automated order management
it can change extremely rapidly. These markets are usually transparent,
with the state of the book being widely visible to most actual and poten-
tial market participants. Short of actually trading, there is no better way
to get a feel for their mechanics than by viewing the INET book (currently
available at www.nasdaqtrader.com) for an actively traded stock (such as
Microsoft, ticker symbol MSFT). The extraordinary level of transparency
traders currently enjoy is a recent phenomenon. New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE) rules historically prohibited revelation of the book. In the 1990s,
this was relaxed to permit visibility of the book on the trading ﬂoor.
Off-ﬂoor visibility was not available until January 2002.1
A market might have multiple limit order books, each managed by a
different broker or other entity. Limit order books might also be used in
conjunction with other mechanisms. When all trading for a security occurs
through a single book, the market is said to be organized as a consolidated
limit order book (CLOB). A CLOB is used for actively traded stocks in
most Asian and European markets.


TRADING MECHANISMS
11
A mechanism’s priority rules govern the sequence in which orders
are executed. Price priority is basic. A limit order to buy priced at 100,
for example, will be executed before an order priced at 99. Time is usu-
ally the secondary priority. At a given price level, orders are executed
ﬁrst-in, ﬁrst-out. Although these priority rules may seem obvious and
sensible, it should be noted that they usually only determine the rel-
ative standing of orders within a given book. There is rarely system-
wide time priority across all books or other components of a hybrid
market.
A trader may desire that an order be executed “at the market,” that is,
at the best available price. If the order quantity is larger than the quantity
available at the single best price on book, the order will “walk the book,”
achieving partial executions at progressively worse prices until the order
is ﬁlled. This may lead to executions at prices far worse than the trader
thought possible at the time of submission. For example, at 10:47:26 on
January 29, 2001, the bid side of the book for IBM on the Island ECN
contained (in its entirety) bids at $112.50, $110.00, $108.00, and $2.63.
The last bid was presumably entered in error, but should it have been
executed, a seller would have obtained $2.63 for a share of IBM at a time
when its market price was in the vicinity of $113.2
A provision in the Euronext system illustrates how surprises of this
sort can be avoided. On Euronext, a market order is not allowed to walk
the book. It will only execute for (at most) the quantity posted at the best
available price. Anything remaining from the original quantity is con-
verted into a limit order at the execution price. For example, if a market
order to buy 1,000 shares arrives when the best offer is 200 shares at €100,
200 shares will be executed at €100, and the remaining 800 shares will be
added to the book as a buy limit order priced at €100. If a trader in fact
wants the order to walk the book, the order must be priced. Attaching a
price to the order forces the trader to consider the worst acceptable price.
INET requires that all orders be priced.
Markets often permit qualiﬁcations and/or variations on the basic limit
order. The time-in-force (TIF) attribute of an order speciﬁes how long the
order is to be considered active. It is essentially a default cancellation time,
although it does not preclude the sender from canceling before the TIF is
reached. Although the precommitment associated with a TIF deprives the
sender of some ﬂexibility, it avoids the communication delays and uncer-
tainties that sometimes arise with transmitted requests for cancellation.
An immediate-or-cancel (IOC) order never goes onto the book. If it cannot
be executed, it leaves no visible trace, and the sender is free to quickly
try another order (or another venue). An all-or-nothing (AON) order is
executed in its entirety or not at all. It avoids the possibility that a par-
tial ﬁll (execution) will, when reported to other traders, move the market
price against the sender, leaving the remaining portion of the order to be
executed at a less favorable price.


12
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
A trader seeking to buy or sell an amount that is large (relative to the
quantities typically posted to the book) is unlikely to feel comfortable dis-
playing the full extent of his or her interest. To make the situation more
attractive, many markets allow hidden and/or reserve orders. Hidden
orders are the simpler of the two. If an order designated as hidden cannot
be executed, it is added to the book but not made visible to other market
participants. The hidden order is available for execution against incoming
orders, the senders of which may be (happily) surprised by ﬁlls at prices
that are better than or quantities that are larger than what they might have
surmised based on what was visible. Hidden orders usually lose priority
to visible orders, a rule that encourages display.
Reserve (“iceberg”) orders are like hidden orders, but their invisibility
is only partial. Some display is required, and if the displayed quantity is
executed, it is refreshed from the reserve quantity. The procedure mimics
a human trader who might feed a large order to the market by splitting it
up into smaller quantities (Esser and Mönch (2005)).
In a limit order market, buyers and sellers interact directly, using
brokers mainly as conduits for their orders. The broker may also, how-
ever, provide credit, clearing services, information, and possibly analytics
designed to implement strategies more sophisticated than those asso-
ciated with the standard order types. The broker does not usually act as a
counterparty to the customer trade.
The data emanating from a limit order market are usually very accurate
and detailed. The real-time feeds allow traders to continuously ascertain
the status of the book and condition strategies on this information. For
the economist, limit order markets offer a record of agents’ interactions at
a level of detail that is rarely enjoyed in other settings. There are, never-
theless, some signiﬁcant generic limitations. First, the sheer volume and
diverse attributes of the data pose computational challenges and make
parsimonious modeling very difﬁcult. More importantly, though, the unit
of observation is typically the order, and it is rarely possible to map a
particular order to others submitted or canceled by the same trader. Mar-
ket participants can’t construct these maps either (except for their own
orders), so this does not preclude us from building models that might
plausibly reﬂect agents’ common-knowledge beliefs. It does, however,
constrain what we can discern about individual trading strategies.
2.2
Floor Markets
Consolidation of trading interest (actual and potential buyers and sell-
ers) is important because it enhances the likelihood that counterparties
will ﬁnd each other. Before electronic markets allowed centralization of
trading to be accomplished virtually, consolidation could only take place
physically, on the ﬂoor of an exchange. In a ﬂoor market, the numerous and


TRADING MECHANISMS
13
dispersed buyers and sellers are represented by a much smaller number of
brokers who negotiate and strike bilateral deals face to face. These brokers
are often called members, as the exchanges were historically organized as
cooperatives.
The members act either as agents, representing the customer orders to
others, or as principals, taking the other side of customer orders. The com-
bination of these two functions, though, suffers from a conﬂict of interest.
A broker who intends to act as a counterparty to his or her customer’s
order does not have an interest in vigorously representing the order to
others on the ﬂoor (who might offer a better a price). For this reason, dual
trading is either expressly forbidden or strongly regulated.
Despite behavior that may appear chaotic and noisy, ﬂoor trading is
usually an orderly process. Hand signals quickly convey the key features
of an order. Deceptive actions, such as bidding lower than another mem-
ber’s current bid (in an attempt to ﬁnd a seller willing to trade at the
inferior price), are forbidden. Transaction prices are quickly reported and
publicly disseminated. Disputes and errors are resolved quickly.
In the nineteenth century, ﬂoor markets proliferated. In the twentieth
century, they consolidated. By the dawn of the twenty-ﬁrst century, they
had largely evaporated.3 The largest markets that still rely primarily on
trading ﬂoors are the U.S. commodity futures markets: the Chicago Board
of Trade, the New York Mercantile Exchange, and Chicago Mercantile
Exchange (the Merc). The last is perhaps the easiest for an outsider to
comprehend, because its trading rules (available online) are particularly
straightforward and clear. The NYSE is sometimes described as a ﬂoor
market. This is indeed its heritage, but the label has become less accurate
as the Exchange has incorporated more electronic mechanisms.
From an empirical viewpoint, it is worth noting that the real-time data
stream emanating from ﬂoor trading in futures markets is meager relative
to what most electronic limit order markets provide. Futures tick data
generally only convey price changes. In a sequence of trades, only those
that establish new price levels are reported. Bids and offers can generally
be obtained only by inquiry. Transaction volumes are not reported.
As measured by the capital generation and allocation that they facili-
tated, and by their historical survival and persistence, the ﬂoor markets
achieved remarkable success. On the other hand, this success led to market
power and political inﬂuence that sometimes worked against customers
and regulators. In recent years, most ﬂoor-based trading has gone elec-
tronic. Like many paradigm shifts, the transition has been painful for the
old guard. Most exchanges have nevertheless navigated the changes and
survived, either by gradually automating or by building electronic markets
de novo.
One event in particular seems to have starkly illuminated the costs of
resisting the change. Through the mid-1990s, the market for futures based
on German government debt (Bund futures) was dominated by a contract


14
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
that was ﬂoor-traded on the London International Financial Futures
Exchange (LIFFE). In 1997, the Deutsche Terminbörse (DTB, now Eurex)
began to aggressively market an electronically traded contract. Over the
course of the next year, trading shifted to the newcomer. The LIFFE
eventually moved trading to an electronic platform and shut down most
ﬂoor trading by the end of 1999. It did not, however, recapture signiﬁcant
trading volume in the Bund contract (Maguire (1998) Codding (1999)).
Despite the rapid ascendancy of electronic systems, their limitations
should not be overlooked. Electronic consolidation has not rendered
face-to-face interactions irrelevant. Many of the same ﬁnancial institu-
tions that rely heavily on electronic access to markets have also gone to
great lengths and expense to maintain the trading operations for their
diverse markets together on large, contiguous trading ﬂoors. This facili-
tates coordination when a deal involves multiple markets. The pricing
and offering of a corporate bond, for example, might well involve the
government bond, interest-rate swap, credit swap, and/or the interest rate
futures desks. Thus, while no longer necessary to realize (in a single mar-
ket) economies of scale, personal proximity may promote (across multiple
markets) economies of scope.
2.3
Dealers
2.3.1
Dealer Markets
A dealer is simply an intermediary who is willing to act as a counterparty
for the trades of his customers. A dealer, or, more commonly, a network of
geographically dispersed electronically linked dealers, may be the domi-
nant mechanism for trade. Some of the largest markets are dealer markets,
including foreign exchange (FX), corporate bond and swap markets.
A trade in a dealer market, such as the FX market, typically starts with
a customer calling a dealer. The dealer quotes bid and ask prices, where-
upon the customer may buy at the dealer’s ask, sell at the dealer’s bid,
or do nothing. This script presumes that the dealer and customer have a
preexisting relationship. This relationship plays a more signiﬁcant role
(in addition to establishing the framework for clearing and settlement),
because the customer’s trading history and behavior may reveal his or her
unexpressed trading desires or information and may therefore affect the
terms of trade that the dealer offers.
The dealer–customer relationship involves reputations established and
sustained by repeated interactions. The dealer’s reputation is contingent
on his or her willingness to always quote a reasonable bid and ask, even
if the dealer would prefer not to trade in a particular direction. The
customer’s reputation is based on his or her frequent acceptance of the
dealer’s terms of trade. A customer who called the dealer repeatedly


TRADING MECHANISMS
15
merely to check the price, never actually trading, would soon ﬁnd the
dealer unresponsive to his or her inquiries.
In a limit order market, a buyer who judges the book’s best ask price
unreasonable may place his or her own bid (buy limit order). In most
dealer markets, this possibility does not exist. Dealers rarely act as an effec-
tive agent for customer limit orders. For example, prior to the Manning
rules (in the mid-1990s), a NASDAQ dealer holding a customer limit order
to buy was under no obligation to display the order, even when the cus-
tomer’s bid bettered those of all other dealers in the market (see appendix
section A.3).
A large customer may have relationships with many dealers. This forms
the basis for competition that mitigates the dealer’s bargaining power.
Small retail customers, however, often do not have such a pool and
therefore have little bargaining power.
Dealer markets are also usually characterized by low transparency. The
dealers provide quotes only in response to customer inquiries, and these
are not publicly visible. Publication of trade prices is unusual. Unlike
consolidated ﬂoor markets, dealer markets are fragmented.
For customer orders, a dealer acts as a counterparty (trading against
the order), and a broker acts as agent (representing the order on behalf of
the customer). These two functions are not necessarily conﬂicting: Both
broker and dealer will proﬁt by successful execution of the customer’s
order. Often, though, the broker and dealer are working at cross-purposes.
An aggressive agent might survey more dealers and bargain harder to ﬁnd
the customer a good price, one that leaves the executing dealer with only
a small proﬁt. A lazy agent might simply take the ﬁrst price quoted by the
ﬁrst dealer. As in ﬂoor markets, this conﬂict of interest is most aggravated
when the broker and dealer are the same or afﬁliated entities.
In addition to dealer–customer interactions, interdealer trading is also
important. The incoming orders that a particular dealer sees are rarely
balanced (as to purchases and sales). There is usually an excess demand
or supply, and accommodating these customer needs may leave the dealer
with an undesired long or short position. In such cases, the dealer will
attempt to sell or buy in the interdealer market. One dealer may contact
another directly and nonanonymously, much as a customer might have
initially contacted him or her (except that the quantity would typically be
larger). Willingness to make a market and trade in these interactions is sus-
tained by reputation and reciprocity. The dealer who is being contacted
might soon need to reach out to balance his or her own position. Alter-
natively, a contact may be made indirectly and anonymously through a
interdealer broker. Finally, interdealer trade in the FX market is typically
conducted via a limit order book (such as EBS or Reuters). From the diver-
sity of these examples, it is clear that the interdealer market is deﬁned by
its participants, not by the mechanism. Analyses of interdealer markets
include Reiss and Werner (1998) and Viswanathan and Wang (2004).


16
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Dealer markets are typically ﬂexible. The ﬁxed technology and infra-
structure costs are low. The main barrier to entry is access to a set of cus-
tomers. Dealing operations are easily scaled up or down. Certain terms of
trade and security characteristics may be set to accommodate customer
preferences. For example, the equity derivatives desk at a bank might sell
a customer a call option for which the underlying strike price, maturity,
and size differ from any other option the desk has ever bought or sold.
2.3.2
Dealers in Hybrid Markets
Dealers can make markets work where they might otherwise fail. Recall
that in a limit order market, customers trade directly with only a minimal
role for the broker or any other intermediary. Liquidity, in the sense of
the ability to trade immediately, is often described as customer-supplied
because it derives from the unexecuted customer orders in the book.
The absence of an intermediary helps keep trading costs low. On the
other hand, the customers’ interests are driven by their immediate trading
needs. They are not usually inclined to provide liquidity in an ongoing
and continuous fashion. This may impair the functioning of the market
because a trading venue’s reputation for always accommodating trades
contributes to its ability to attract order ﬂow.
Limit order markets generally have difﬁculty with small stocks, securi-
ties for which trading interest is insufﬁcient to sustain continuous trading.
In many cases, continuous trading may not be necessary. That is, market
participants may be satisﬁed with a call mechanism (described shortly)
that provides for trading only at several speciﬁed times of the day. Conti-
nuous trading, though, offers more ﬂexibility in hedging and rebalanc-
ing portfolios. A dealer may make continuous trading possible when the
natural customer-supplied liquidity in the book would not sufﬁce.
Ideally, dealers would arise endogenously, perhaps as customers who
gain familiarity with the market in the course of managing their own
trades and then perceive opportunities in more actively supplying bids
and offers. In actively traded securities, this may well be occurring. In low-
activity securities, though, the potential dealer’s costs of continuously
monitoring bids and offers may be too large to recover from the relatively
infrequent trades. In these instances, continuous liquidity requires that a
dealer be designated as such (by the market authority) and provided with
additional incentives. Perhaps the best-known designated dealer is the
NYSE specialist. The specialist has many roles and responsibilities, but
an important one is maintaining a two-sided market when there is nothing
on the limit order book and no one else on the ﬂoor bidding or offering.
Establishing the proper incentives for designated dealers, though, has
proven to be difﬁcult. The issues involve measuring the liquidity that
the dealers provide, determining the beneﬁciaries of this liquidity, allo-
cating the costs, and balancing the rights of dealers against the public


TRADING MECHANISMS
17
users of limit orders (who are usually the dealers’ direct competitors).
The Euronext equity markets have adopted a relatively straightforward
solution. Taking the position that a ﬁrm’s stockholders are the most direct
beneﬁciaries of continuous liquidity, a ﬁrm may contract with and directly
compensate an agent who agrees to post continuous bids and offers.
More typically, though, dealers are implicitly compensated in the form
of trading proﬁts, generated within a complex structure of privileges and
obligations.
As a rough generalization, technology has weakened the competitive
position of dealers (as it has, arguably, the competitive position of interme-
diaries in many nonsecurity markets). Electronic order management sys-
tems, in particular, now enable customers to update and revise their limit
orders rapidly enough to respond to market conditions. They can quickly
supply liquidity when it is proﬁtable to do so and quickly withdraw their
bids and offers when markets are volatile. The U.S. over-the-counter stock
market (NASDAQ), for example, has historically been considered a dealer
market. In recent years, though, trading activity has shifted onto limit
order markets, and the dealer presence is considerably diminished.
Dealers also serve a useful function in facilitating large (block) trades.
The block market (also called the upstairs market) is mainly institutional.
When an institution contacts a dealer to ﬁll a large order, the dealer can act
as principal (taking the other side of the order and committing capital), try
to locate a counterparty for the full amount, work the order over time, or
some combination of these. The dealer’s advantage here thus lies in access
to capital, knowledge of potential counterparties, and expertise (or, nowa-
days, algorithmic systems) executing large orders over time. The rela-
tionship between the customer and dealer also expedites the trade. The
customer implicitly warrants that his or her institution is “uninformed,”
speciﬁcally, not seeking to exploit a short-term informational advantage,
such as prior knowledge of an earnings announcement (Seppi (1990)).
2.4
Auctions and Other Clearing Mechanisms
When there are multiple buyers and multiple sellers concentrated in one
venue at one time, trade need not be coordinated. Agents will contact each
other sequentially, striking bilateral bargains. Economically inefﬁcient
outcomes, however, can easily arise.4 Another practical consideration is
that if the bargaining is conducted by brokers on behalf of customers,
and the trade prices are publicly reported, many customers will see their
trades executed at prices worse than the best price realized over the entire
set of trades. This is unlikely to promote conﬁdence in the brokers or the
mechanism.
A single-price clearing avoids these problems. It is generally imple-
mented with a single-price double-sided auction. Supply and demand


18
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
curves are constructed by ranking bids and offers. Prices, quantities,
and trader identities are usually determined by maximizing the feasible
trading volume.
The double-sided auction is widely used in securities markets. For
securities with low natural trading interest, most trade occurs using peri-
odic auctions (also called ﬁxings). The Euronext markets, for example,
conduct auctions once or twice per day (depending on the level of inter-
est). Double-sided auctions are usually used to open continuous trading
sessions (Euronext, Tokyo Stock Exchange, NYSE, etc.). They are also fre-
quently used at the close of continuous trading sessions. Closing prices
are widely used as reference prices in valuing margin positions, valuing
mutual fund shares, determining the payoffs to cash-settled derivatives,
and (occasionally) determining terms of exchange in mergers. In these
situations a small change in the reference price can cause substantial gains
or losses in the derivative position. With so much at stake, it is not sur-
prising that many cases of market manipulation involve attempts to “mark
the close.”5
Although auctions may appear simple, seemingly minor details of
implementation can have profound effects. Klemperer (2004) notes that
“what really matters in auction design are the same issues that any indus-
try regulator would recognize as key concerns: discouraging collusive,
entry-deterring and predatory behavior” (p. 104). Although the context of
the statement is a discussion of single-side auctions, it is not a bad maxim
for the double-sided security variety.
Experience suggests that a particularly important aspect of design is the
deadline for order submission. As any casual observer of eBay activity can
attest, most bidding action occurs very shortly before the ﬁnal deadline
(Roth and Ockenfels (2002)). Why bid early and give competitors a lengthy
interval in which to contemplate their next moves? To discourage wait-
ing until the last instant, the Euronext markets employ random stopping
times. Within a brief window (on the order of seconds), order acceptance
may be terminated at any point. This introduces uncertainty into the last-
instant strategy and so discourages its use.6 The deadline may also be
extended if the price at the scheduled clearing would constitute a large
movement from a preceding price (such as the previous day’s close).
To further minimize the noise in price determination, earlier deadlines
may be imposed on large or destabilizing orders. (An order is destabilizing
if it is in the same direction as the change in the likely clearing price, a
buy order, for example, if the other orders cumulated to that time imply a
clearing price above the previous close.) To prevent the strategy of entering
orders on both sides of the market and then canceling one at the last
moment, cancellations of stabilizing orders are usually subject to the same
early deadline as the submission of destabilizing orders.
Although most auctions in secondary (post–initial offering) markets
are double-sided, single-sided auctions are extensively used in primary


TRADING MECHANISMS
19
(initial offering) markets. These include the U.S. Treasury debt markets,
and most U.S. municipal bond offerings. Auctions are also used, though
not as often, for initial issues of equity.
Single-sided auctions can sometimes arise as an ancillary mechanism
in a market where most trading takes place by other means. In ﬂoor tra-
ding on the NYSE, for example, one agent, the specialist, acts as agent for
customer market orders (among other responsibilities). In this role, the
specialist may auction a market order by indicating quantity and direction
(e.g., “2,000 shares to buy”) and letting other brokers compete to offer the
best price.
The economic literature on auctions is extensive. Useful texts include
(in order of ascending complexity) Klemperer (2004), Krishna (2002), and
Milgrom (2004). Friedman and Rust (1993) is an excellent collection of
articles focusing on double auctions.
2.5
Bargaining
Some security trading interactions closely resemble the usual customer/
vendor situation in goods markets wherein a shopkeeper ﬁxes a posted
price and the passing customer can purchase (or not). Although the posted
price is almost certain to be constrained by larger forces of competition
(the customer’s access to alternative suppliers or substitute goods), the
interaction is essentially, in the microscopic view, a bargaining game. In
securities trading, the retail customer and her dealer may be in a similar
situation. A retail customer in the United States who wishes to buy or
sell a municipal bond will contact a broker and solicit prices at which
the broker (acting in a capacity as dealer) would buy or sell. The broker
states the prices, and the customer can trade (or not). Faced with unfavor-
able terms an institutional trader might search the prices of other dealers
with whom they have relationships, but individuals rarely have accounts
with more than one broker. Recent work on the U.S. municipal securities
markets highlights the role of bargaining power in a dealer market (Green,
Holliﬁeld, and Schuerhoff (2005)).
In economic terms, this is an ultimatum game. In the standard full-
information ultimatum game, one agent (the allocator) proposes a division
of the total payoff, and the other agent (the recipient) either accepts or
rejects the proposal. If the recipient accepts, both players receive the pro-
posed payoff; if the recipient rejects, both players receive zero. The main
feature of this literature is the divergence between the predicted rational
outcomes and those that arise in experiments (and in most individu-
als’ experiences). The rational recipient accepts any proposal that gives
any nonzero payoff, and knowing this, the rational allocator keeps for
him- or herself almost all of the total payoff. In practice, recipients often


20
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
reject proposals perceived as unfair, and this forces allocators to disci-
pline their greed. The economic literature on these games in voluminous.
Thaler (1988) and Camerer and Thaler (1995) are good introductions. Roth
(1995) surveys experimental evidence.
When the total payoff is known to the allocator but not the recipient, the
latter cannot so readily assess the fairness of a proposal. This uncertainty
favors the allocator, in this case, the dealer (see, for example, Kagel, Kim,
and Moser 1996). Perhaps the strongest signal about the total payoff in the
dealer–customer interaction is the record of prices of recent trades. For
this reason, U.S. regulators have sought to promote trade price publication
through a variety of initiatives.7
Another standard bargaining situation arises in Liquidnet, a trading
system for U.S. institutional investors. Institutions anonymously enter
the quantities and directions (buy or sell) of desired trades. The Liquidnet
system searches over all the entries. When it ﬁnds a match, it contacts the
buyer and seller and places them in a virtual meeting room, where they
can (anonymously) bargain over price. The bargaining protocol essentially
allows the recipient to reject the allocator’s initial proposal and suggest
another, and so on, indeﬁnitely.
When the situation allows for repeated counter proposals, the
Rubinstein (1982) theorem comes into play. Brieﬂy, the theorem sets out
some reasonable sufﬁcient conditions (most important, time preference)
under which the full-information game will immediately converge to the
even-split outcome. The intuition is that both sides can clearly see the
consequences of a strategy (which might at ﬁrst seem reasonable) of mak-
ing proposals that are far from an even split and marginally improving
them (“I’ll sell at $1,000”; “I bid one cent”; “I’m offering at $999.99”;
“I bid two cents,” etc.). This will simply dissipate value through delay.
In a Liquidnet negotiation, both parties know bid and ask prices from
other markets (although these will typically be for smaller quantities).
Usually the midpoint of the best intermarket bid and offer is proposed
and accepted.
2.6
Crossing Networks and Derivative Pricing
In a crossing, the buyer and seller are paired (usually anonymously) for an
agreed-on quantity. The trade is priced by reference to a price determined
in and derived from some other market. Thus, though almost all of the
devices considered prior to this can in principle serve as the sole mar-
ket mechanism, a crossing network, in its reliance on a price determined
elsewhere, is inherently a hybrid device.
In ITG’s POSIT system, for example, potential buyers and sellers enter
demands (quantities to buy or sell). These are not made visible. At the
time of the crossing, the system matches buyers and sellers (if possible).


TRADING MECHANISMS
21
The execution price of the trade is the midpoint of best bid and offer in
the listing market. Thirteen crossings are scheduled each day. The exact
time of a cross is partially random, to discourage either side from entering
a surreptitious bid or offer to obtain a more favorable price.
Instinet (an institutional brokerage) runs a cross where the match price
is the average price of all trades on the day, weighted by volume. Buyers
and sellers enter desired quantities and are paired off in the morning, prior
to the start of regular trading. After the market closes in the afternoon, the
value-weighted average price (VWAP) is computed, and the trades are
executed.
In both the POSIT and Instinet VWAP crossings, quantities are matched
prior to the determination of the price. A crossing can also use a price
determined prior to the quantity matching. The Instinet closing cross
allows institutions to submit, after the regular market close, orders that
will be matched (if possible) and executed at the closing price. Instinet
also conducts crossings in foreign exchange.
Crossings must be designed to discourage manipulation (if the price is
determined after the quantity match) and predatory trading (if the price is
determined prior to the quantity match). A strategy of the latter sort might
involve submitting orders in response to news announcements made after
the determination of the closing price, in the hopes of picking off unwary
counterparties. In view of an after-hours announcement of a product
recall, for example, the day’s closing price is likely to be high relative to
the following open. A sell order might trade against someone who hadn’t
heard the news and canceled their buy order. To prevent this, Instinet
cancels crosses when there are news announcements and monitors
participants, expelling those whose strategies appear to be news-driven.
Another form of derivative pricing is price matching. This generally
refers to a dealer’s strategy of precommitting to execute orders at the
best visible bid or offer (posted by others). The precommitment is made
selectively, to brokers representing customers, typically retail customers,
whose orders are likely to be proﬁtable for the dealer.
The pricing in crossing markets is sometimes described as derivative,
a usage that sometimes leads to confusion. In ﬁnance, a derivative secu-
rity has a value or payoff that is a function of some other security (the
underlying). A derivative mechanism is a device for executing trades in
a security based on a price determined for the same security in another
market.
2.7
Concluding Remarks
The complexity of institutional arrangements and the rapid pace of their
evolution force the modeler to exercise judgment in deciding which


22
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
features are important to the task at hand. In practice, market microstruc-
ture analyses deal with the details at varying levels of abstraction.
Least demanding of ﬁdelity to institutional details are the descriptive
statistical analyses of high-frequency trade price behavior, which can be
viewed as atheoretic forecasting models. At a higher level of complexity,
we attempt to identify passive and active sides of trades (the bid and
offer quotes and the traders who hit or lift them). For these purposes,
we might view, for example, the bids of dealers and the bids representing
customer limit orders as equivalent. These models often have a fair degree
of economic content yet remain sufﬁciently tractable to estimate.
In reality, though, the agent in a limit order market is intrinsically
neither active nor passive but makes a choice conditional on the state of
the book. Embedding this choice in a dynamic structural model of price
evolution has proven to be extremely difﬁcult. For the most part, current
models make and test predictions about the determinants of order choice.
Studies addressing regulatory issues obviously require detailed know-
ledge of the rules in question but also need an appreciation for how these
rules are applied and interpreted in practice. Often a particular rule or fea-
ture is too difﬁcult to model structurally, though, and we attempt to draw
welfare conclusions based on comparisons of relatively crude descriptive
statistics before and after the change. These conclusions must frequently
be qualiﬁed due to confounding events and agents’ responses to the rule
changes. Although it is relatively easy to assess direct trading costs (e.g.,
brokerage commissions), for example, it is virtually impossible to mea-
sure indirect costs (e.g., the cost of monitoring the status of a limit order)
or the cost/beneﬁts of degraded/enhanced risk sharing.


3
The Roll Model of Trade Prices
3.1
Overview
In taking a microstructure perspective on security price dynamics, we
shift focus from monthly or daily characteristics down to the features that
come into play at horizons of a minute or second. Figure 3.1 illustrates
this transition. For a randomly chosen stock (Premcor, symbol PCO, sub-
sequently acquired), the ﬁgure depicts in panel A the sequence of actual
trade prices over October 2003, then in panel B the prices on a particu-
lar day (October 30), and ﬁnally in panel C a particular hour on that day
(11 A.M. to noon). In panel C, trade prices are augmented by plots of bid
and ask quotes.
The most detailed ﬁgure hints at the extent of microstructure complex-
ities. The three prices (bid, ask, and trade) differ. None are continuous
(they all have jumps), but the bid and ask are continual in the sense
that they always have values. Trades are more discrete, occurring as a
sequence of well-deﬁned points. The three prices tend to move together
but certainly not in lockstep. The bid and ask sometimes change and then
quickly revert. Trades usually occur at the posted bid and offer prices (but
not always). And so on.
I do not attempt at the outset to build a model that can explain or
even describe all of these features. Instead, I begin with a model of high-
frequency trade prices originally suggested by Roll (1984). It is an excellent
starting point for several reasons. It illustrates a dichotomy fundamental to
many microstructure models—the distinction between price components
due to fundamental security value and those attributable to the market
organization and trading process. The former arise from information
23


24
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Figure 3.1.
PCO price record at different time scales.
about future security cash ﬂows and are long-lasting, whereas the lat-
ter are transient. The model possesses sensible economic and statistical
representations, and it is easy to go back and forth between them. The
model is useful, offering descriptions and interpretations that are, in many
situations, quite satisfactory.
This chapter develops the Roll model by ﬁrst presenting the random-
walk model, which describes the evolution of the fundamental security
value. The discussion then turns to bid and ask quotes, order arrivals, and
the resulting transaction price process.
3.2
The Random-Walk Model of Security Prices
Before ﬁnancial economists began to concentrate on the trading process,
the standard statistical model for a security price was the random walk.


THE ROLL MODEL OF TRADE PRICES
25
The random-walk model is no longer considered to be a complete and
valid description of short-term price dynamics, but it nevertheless retains
an important role as a model for the fundamental security value. Further-
more, some of the lessons learned from early statistical tests of the random-
walk hypothesis have ongoing relevance in modeling market data.
Let pt denote the transaction price at time t, where t indexes regular
points of real (“calendar” or “wall-clock”) time, for example, end-of-day,
end-of-hour, and so on. Because it is unlikely that trades occur exactly at
these times, we will approximate these observations by using the prices
of the last (most recent) trade, for example, the day’s closing price. The
random-walk model (with drift) is:
pt = pt−1 + µ + ut,
(3.1)
where the ut, t = 0, . . . , are independently and identically distributed ran-
dom variables. Intuitively, they arise from new information that bears on
the security value. µ is the expected price change (the drift). The units
of pt are either levels (e.g., dollars per share) or logarithms. The log form
is sometimes more convenient because price changes can be interpreted
as continuously compounded returns. Some phenomena, however, are
closely linked to a level representation. Price discreteness, for example,
reﬂects a tick size (minimum pricing increment) that is generally set in
level units.
For reasons that will be discussed shortly, the drift can be dropped in
most microstructure analyses. When µ = 0, pt cannot be forecast beyond
its most recent value: E[pt+1 | pt, pt−1, . . .] = pt. A process with this prop-
erty is generally described as a martingale. One deﬁnition of a martin-
gale is a discrete stochastic process {xt} where E|xt| < ∞for all t, and
E(xt+1 | xt, xt−1, . . . ) = xt (see Karlin and Taylor (1975) or Ross (1996)).
Martingale behavior of asset prices is a classic result arising in many
economic models with individual optimization, absence of arbitrage, or
security market equilibrium (Cochrane (2005)). The result is generally
contingent, however, on assumptions of frictionless trading opportunities,
which are not appropriate in most microstructure applications.
The martingale nevertheless retains a prominent role. To develop this
idea, note that expectations in the last paragraph are conditioned on
lagged pt or xt, that is, the history of the process. A more general def-
inition involves conditioning on broader information sets. The process
{xt} is a martingale with respect to another (possibly multidimensional)
process {zt} if E|xt| < ∞for all t and E(xt+1 | zt, zt−1, . . .) = xt (Karlin
and Taylor (1975), deﬁnition 1.2, p. 241). In particular, suppose that at
some terminal time the cash value or payoff of a security is a random
variable v. Traders form a sequence of beliefs based on a sequence of
information sets 1, 2, . . . This sequence does not contract: Something
known at time t is known at time τ > t. Then the conditional expectation


26
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
xt = E[v|t] is a martingale with respect to the sequence of information
sets {k}.
When the conditioning information is “all public information,” the
conditional expectation is sometimes called the fundamental value or
(with a nod to the asset pricing literature) the efﬁcient price of the security.
It is the starting point for many of the microstructure models considered
here. One of the basic goals of microstructure analysis is a detailed and
realistic view of how informational efﬁciency arises, that is, the process by
which new information comes to be impounded or reﬂected in prices. In
microstructure analyses, transaction prices are usually not martingales.
Sometimes it is not even the case that the public information includes
the history of transaction prices. (In dealer markets, trades are often not
reported.) By imposing economic or statistical structure, though, it is often
possible to identify a martingale component of the price (with respect to
a particular information set). Later chapters will indicate how this can be
accomplished.
A random-walk is a process constructed as the sum of independently
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) zero-mean random variables (Ross
(1996), p. 328). It is a special case of a martingale. The price in Equa-
tion 3.1, for example, cumulates the ut. Because the ut are i.i.d., the price
process is time-homogenous, that is, it exhibits the same behavior when-
ever in time we sample it. This is only sensible if the economic process
underlying the security is also time-homogenous. Stocks are claims on
ongoing economic activities and are therefore plausibly approximated in
the long run by random walks. Securities such as bonds, swaps, options,
and so on, however, have ﬁnite maturity. Furthermore, they usually have
well-deﬁned boundary conditions at maturity that affect their values well
in advance of maturity. The behavior of these securities over short sam-
ples may still be empirically well approximated by a random-walk model,
but the random walk is not a valid description of the long-run behavior.
3.3
Statistical Analysis of Price Series
Statistical inference in the random-walk model appears straightforward.
Suppose that we have a sample {p1, p2, . . . , pT}, generated in accor-
dance with Equation 3.1. Because the ut are i.i.d., the price changes
pt = pt −pt−1 should be i.i.d. with mean µ and variance Var(ut) = σ2
u,
for which we can compute the usual estimates. When we analyze actual
data samples, however, we often encounter three features that should
at the very least suggest wariness in the interpretation and subsequent
use of the estimates. Short-run security price changes typically exhibit
(1) means very close to zero, (2) extreme dispersion, and (3) depen-
dence between successive observations. Each of these deserves further
elaboration.


THE ROLL MODEL OF TRADE PRICES
27
3.3.1
Near-Zero Mean Returns
In microstructure data samples µ is usually small relative to the estimation
error of its usual estimate, the arithmetic mean. For this reason it is often
preferable to drop the mean return from the model, implicitly setting µ
to zero. Zero is, of course, a biased estimate of µ, but its estimation error
will generally be lower than that of the arithmetic mean.
For example, suppose that t indexes days. Consider the properties of
the annual log price change implied by the log random-walk model:
p365 −p0 =
365

t=1
pt = µAnnual +
365

t=1
ut
(3.2)
where µAnnual = 365 µ. The annual variance is Var(p365 −p0) = 365σ2
u. A
typical U.S. stock might have an annual expected return of µAnnual =
0.10 (10%) and an annual variance of σ2
Annual = 0.252. The implied daily
expected return is µDay = 0.10/365 = 0.000274, and the implied daily vari-
ance is σ2
Day = 0.252/365. With n = 365 daily observations, the standard
error of estimate for the sample average is

σ2
Day/n =

(0.252/365)/365 =
0.000685. This is about two and a half times the true mean. An estimate of
zero is clearly biased downward, but the standard error of estimate is only
0.000274. At the cost of a little bias, we can greatly reduce the estimation
error.
As we reﬁne the frequency of observations from annually to monthly,
to daily, and so on, the number of observations increases. More numerous
observations usually enhance the precision of estimates. Here, though,
the increase in observations is not accompanied by any increase in the
calendar span of the sample. So do we gain or not? It depends. Merton
(1980) shows that estimates of second moments (variances, covariances)
are helped by more frequent sampling. Estimates of mean returns are
not. For this reason, the expected return will often be dropped from our
microstructure models.
3.3.2
Extreme Dispersion
Statistical analyses of speculative price changes at all horizons generally
encounter sample distributions with fat tails. The incidence of extreme
values is so great as to raise doubt whether population parameters like
kurtosis, skewness, or even the variance of the underlying distribution
are ﬁnite.
The convenient assumption that price changes are normally distributed
is routinely violated. For example, from July 7, 1962, to December 31,
2004 (10,698 observations), the average daily return on the Standard &


28
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Poor’s (S&P) 500 index is about 0.0003 (0.03%), and the standard devi-
ation is about 0.0094. Letting (z) denote the standard normal distri-
bution function, if returns are normally distributed, then the number
of days with returns below 5% is expected to be 10, 698 × [(−0.05
−0.0003)/0.0094] ≈0.0005, that is, considerably less than 1. In fact, there
are eight such realizations (with the minimum of −20.5% occurring on
October 19, 1987).
Statistical analysis of this sort of dispersion falls under the rubric of
extreme value analysis (see, for example, Coles (2001) and Embrechts,
Kluppelberg, and Mikosch (1997)). For a random variable X the popula-
tion moment of order α is deﬁned as EX α. The normal density possesses
ﬁnite moments of all orders. In other distributions, though, a moment may
be inﬁnite because as X goes to ±∞, X α increases faster than the prob-
ability density declines. If EX α is ﬁnite, then the corresponding sample
estimate X α
t /T, where T is the sample size, is an asymptotically consis-
tent estimate of EX α (using a law of large numbers). Hypothesis testing,
however, often requires knowing the asymptotic variance of the sample
estimate, which requires existence of the moment of order 2α. To get the
standard error of the mean, for example, we need a consistent estimate of
the variance.
One recent study suggests that ﬁnite moments for daily equity returns
exist only up to order 3 and for daily trading volume only up to order
1.5 (Gabaix et al. 2003). These ﬁndings, if correct, impose substantive
restrictions on the sorts of models that can sensibly be estimated.
Can safely we ignore this evidence? After all, why should one be
concerned about convergence failures in inﬁnite samples? The answer
is that whatever one’s beliefs about the properties of the distribution
generating the data, the existence of extreme values in ﬁnite samples
is an irrefutable fact leading to many practical consequences. Sam-
ple estimates may be dominated by a few extreme values. Increasing
sample size does not increase precision as fast we’d expect. Estimated
parameters are sensitive to model speciﬁcation. Finally, and most dis-
turbingly in trading applications, conclusions drawn from the model are
fragile.
In some cases, it sufﬁces to apply an ad hoc transformation to the
variable. If trading volume is overdispersed, for example, one can work
with the logarithm or reciprocal (as long as volume is positive). Such
transformations applied to price changes or returns, however, are less
attractive. We can also try to model the overdispersion. Many long-tailed
distributions can be constructed as mixtures of well-behaved distribu-
tions. The question then arises as to the economic meaning of the mixing
variable. One common interpretation is information intensity, that is,
some measure that generally reﬂects the rate of information arrival and
its importance for valuation. Shephard (2005) discusses the different
perspectives on this important concept.


THE ROLL MODEL OF TRADE PRICES
29
3.3.3
Dependence of Successive Observations
Time-series data are ordered, and statistical analysis must at least allow for
the possibility that the ordering is associated with dependence. The most
important summary measures of time-series dependence are the auto-
covariances and autocorrelations. These are deﬁned for a real-valued
time series {xt} as Cov(xt, xt−k) and Corr(xt, xt−k) for k = 0, 1, . . .. Under
assumptions discussed more fully in chapter 4, these quantities depend
only on k (the separation between the component terms). Accordingly
they may be denoted γk ≡Cov(xt, xt−k) and ρk = Corr(xt, xt−k). When the
mean of the series is zero, γk may be estimated as the sample average
cross-product, ˆγk = (T −k)−1 T
s=k+1 xtxt−k, and the autocorrelations as
ˆρk = ˆγk/ˆγ0 (see Fuller (1996), pp. 313–20).
The increments (changes) in a random walk are uncorrelated. So we
would expect to ﬁnd ˆρk ≈0 for k̸ = 0. In actual samples, however, the ﬁrst-
order autocorrelations of short-run speculative price changes are usually
negative. In October 2003, there were roughly 7,000 trades in PCO. The
estimated ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of the price changes is ˆρ1 = −0.064
(with an estimated standard error of 0.012). An economic explanation for
this ﬁnding is the main contribution of the Roll model.
3.4
The Roll Model of Bid, Ask, and Transaction Prices
In returning to the economic perspective, we keep the random-walk
assumption but now apply it to the (martingale) efﬁcient price instead
of the actual transaction price. Denoting this efﬁcient price by mt, we
assume that mt = mt−1 + ut, where, as before the ut are i.i.d. zero-mean
random variables. We also suppose that all trades are conducted through
dealers (section 2.3.1). The best dealer quotes are bid and ask (offer) prices,
bt and at. If a customer wants to buy (any quantity), he or she must pay
the dealer’s ask price (thereby lifting the ask). If a customer wants to sell,
he or she receives the dealer’s bid price (hitting the bid). Dealers incur
a cost of c per trade. This charge reﬂects costs like clearing fees and per
trade allocations of ﬁxed costs, such as computers, telephones, and so on.
These costs are noninformational, in the sense that they are not related
to the dynamics of mt. If dealers compete to the point where the costs
are just covered, the bid and ask are mt −c and mt + c, respectively. The
bid-ask spread is at −bt = 2c, a constant.
At time t, there is a trade at transaction price pt, which may be
expressed as
pt = mt + qtc,
(3.3)
where qt is a trade direction indicator set to +1 if the customer is buying
and −1 if the customer is selling. We also assume that buys and sells are
equally likely, serially independent (a buy this period does not change the


30
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
probability of a buy next period), and that agents buy or sell independently
of ut (a customer buy or sell is unrelated to the evolution of mt). This model
is most clearly explicated and analyzed in Roll (1984), and will henceforth
be referred to as the Roll model, but certain elements of the analysis were
ﬁrst discussed by Niederhoffer and Osborne (1966).
The Roll model has two parameters, c and σ2
u. These are most con-
veniently estimated from the variance and ﬁrst-order autocovariance of
the price changes, pt. The variance is
γ0 ≡Var(pt) = E(pt)2 = E

q2
t−1c2 + q2
t c2 −2qt−1qtc2
−2qt−1utc + 2qtutc + u2
t

= 2c2 + σ2
u.
(3.4)
The last equality follows because in expectation, all of the cross-products
vanish except for those involving q2
t , q2
t−1, and u2
t . The ﬁrst-order auto-
covariance is
γ1 ≡Cov

pt−1, pt

= Ept−1pt = E

c2 
qt−2qt−1 −q2
t−1 −qt−2qt
+ qt−1qt

+ c

qtut−1 −qt−1ut−1 + utqt−1 −utqt−2

= −c2.
(3.5)
It is easily veriﬁed that all autocovariances of order 2 or higher are zero.
From the above, it is clear that c = √−γ1 and σ2
u = γ0 + 2γ1. Given a sample
of data, it is sensible to estimate γ0 and γ1 and apply these transforma-
tions to obtain estimates of the model parameters. Harris (1990) reports
distributional results.
Based on all trades for PCO in October 2003, the estimated ﬁrst-order
autocovariance of the price changes is ˆγ1 = −0.0000294. This implies
c = $0.017 and a spread of 2c = $0.034. The Roll model is often used in
situations where we don’t possess bid and ask data. In this sample, how-
ever, we do: the (time-weighted) average NYSE spread in the sample is
$0.032, so the Roll estimate is fairly close.
Although this agreement is comforting, it should be noted that the
validity of the assumptions underlying the model is questionable. The
plot in the one-hour segment of ﬁgure 3.1 suggests that the bid-ask spread
is varying. In fact, over October it ranged between $0.01 and $0.49. Con-
trary to the assumption of serial independence, the correlation between qt
and qt−1 is about 0.34. That is, buys tend to follow buys, and sells tend to
follow sells. Contrary to the assumption of independence between qt and
ut, changes in the quote midpoint are positively correlated with the most
recent trade direction. These are all important violations of the assump-
tions. In later chapters we will investigate modiﬁcations to the model that
will accommodate these effects.


4
Univariate Time-Series Analysis
The Roll model described in the last chapter is a simple structural model,
with a clear mapping to parameters (the variance and autocovariance
of price changes) that are easily estimated. There are many interesting
questions, though, that go beyond parameter estimation. We might want
to forecast prices beyond the end of our data sample or to identify the
series of mt (the unobserved efﬁcient prices) underlying our data. Fur-
thermore, when we suspect that the structural model is misspeciﬁed, we
might prefer to make assumptions about the data, rather than about the
model.
To address these issues, the present chapter examines the Roll model
from a different viewpoint. Whereas the previous chapter took a struc-
tural economic perspective, the present one adopts a more data-oriented
statistical “reduced-form” approach. In the process of going back and
forth between the structural and statistical representations, we illustrate
econometric techniques that are very useful in more general situations.
The chapter begins by describing some useful general properties of time
series, proceeds to moving average and autoregressive models, and then
discussing forecasting and estimation.
4.1
Stationarity and Ergodicity
Much statistical inference relies on the law of large numbers (LLN) and
central limit theorem (CLT). These results establish the limiting proper-
ties of estimators as the sample size increases. The usual forms of these
theorems apply to data samples consisting of independent observations.
31


32
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Time-series data are by nature dependent. To maintain the strength of
the LLN and CLT when independence doesn’t hold, we rely on alter-
native versions of these results that assume stationarity and ergodicity.
The following is an intuitive presentation of these concepts. White (2001)
presents a more rigorous discussion.
A time series {xt} with constant mean, Ext = µ, and autocovariances
Cov(xt, xt−k) = γk that do not depend on t is said to be covariance
stationary. A time series for which all joint density functions of the
form f (xt), f (xt, xt+1), . . . , f (xt, xt+1, xt+2), . . . don’t depend on t is (strictly)
stationary.
The price changes implied by the Roll model, pt, are covari-
ance stationary: Ept = 0 and Cov(pt, pt−k) = γk. The price levels
are not covariance stationary. (Among other things, Var(pt) increases
with t.) Covariance stationarity of the pt would also be violated if we
replaced the homoscedasticity assumption Eu2
t = σ2
u with something like
Eu2
t = 5 + Cos(t) or a similar time-dependent feature.1
We sometimes describe a sequence of independent observations by
saying that an observation carries no memory of observations earlier in
the sequence. This is too restrictive for time-series analysis. We typically
assume instead that the effects of earlier observations decay and die out
with the passage of time. A time series is ergodic if its local stochastic
behavior is (possibly in the limit) independent of the starting point, that
is, initial conditions. An ergodic process eventually “forgets” where it
started. The price level in the Roll model is not ergodic: The randomness
in the level is cumulative over time. But the price changes are ergodic:
pt is independent of pt−k for k ≥2. Nonergodicity could be introduced
by positing mt = mt−1 + ut + z, where z is a zero-mean random variable
drawn once at time zero.
The economic models discussed in later chapters (particularly the
asymmetric information models) are often placed in settings where there
is a single random draw of the security’s terminal payoff and the price
converges toward this value. The price changes in these models are not
ergodic because everything is conditional on the value draw. Nor are
they covariance stationary (due to the convergence). Empirical analyses of
these models use various approaches. We sometimes assume that a sam-
ple consists of a string of these models placed end to end (for example, a
sequence of trading days). In this view the sample is an ensemble, a col-
lection of independent sample path realizations. Alternatively, we might
view the models as stylized descriptions of effects that overlap in some
unspeciﬁed fashion that results in covariance stationarity. For example,
in each time period, we might have a new draw of some component of
ﬁrm value.
Domowitz and El-Gamal (1999) note that ergodicity, in the sense of
dependence on initial conditions, may be an important attribute of mar-
ket mechanisms. In the long run, we would expect security prices to


UNIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANALYSIS
33
reﬂect fundamentals. A trade mechanism that induces persistent price
components might impair this adjustment.
4.2
Moving Average Models
We will often assume that a time series like {pt} is covariance sta-
tionary, and now we turn to various ways in which the series can be
represented. We start with a white noise process: a time series {εt} where
Eεt = 0, Var(εt) = σ2
ε , and Cov(εt, εs) = 0 for s̸ = t. This is obviously covari-
ance stationary. In many economic settings, it is convenient and plausible
to assume that {εt} are strictly stationary and even normally distributed,
but these assumptions will be avoided here. White noise processes are
convenient building blocks for constructing dependent time series. One
such construction is the moving average (MA) model. The moving average
model of order one (the MA(1) process) is:
xt = εt + θεt−1.
(4.1)
The white noise driving a time-series model is variously termed the
disturbance, error, or innovation series. From a statistical viewpoint, they
all amount to the same thing. The economic interpretations and connota-
tions, however, vary. When randomness is being added to a nonstochastic
dynamic structural model, the term disturbance suggests a shock to which
the system subsequently adjusts. When forecasting is the main concern,
error conveys a sense of discrepancy between the observed value and the
model prediction. Innovation is the word that is most loaded with eco-
nomic connotations. The innovation is what the econometrician learns
about the process at time t (beyond what’s known from prior observa-
tions). Moving forward in time, it is the update to the econometrician’s
information set. In multivariate models, when xt comprises a particularly
varied, comprehensive, and economically meaningful collection of vari-
ables, the innovation series is often held to proxy the update to the agents’
common information set as well.
The pt in the Roll model have the property that the autocovariances
are zero beyond lag one. The MA(1) model in (4.1) also has this prop-
erty. For this process, the variance and ﬁrst-order autocovariance are
γ0 = (1 + θ2)σ2
ε , γ1 = θσ2
ε , and γk = 0 for k > 1. More generally, the moving
average model of order K is
xt = εt + θ1εt−1 + · · · + θKεt−K.
The MA(K) process is covariance stationary and has the property that
γj = 0 for j > K. If we let K = ∞, we arrive at the inﬁnite-order moving
average process.


34
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Now comes a point of some subtlety. If we believe that the {pt} are
generated by the Roll model (a structural economic model), can we assert
that a corresponding moving average model (a statistical model) exists?
By playing around with the θ and σ2
ε parameters in the MA(1) model,
we can obviously match the variance and ﬁrst-order autocovariance of
the structural pt process. But this is not quite the same thing as claim-
ing that the full joint distribution of the pt realizations generated by
the structural model could also be generated by an MA(1) model. More-
over, there’s a good reason for suspecting this shouldn’t be possible.
The structural model has two (uncorrelated) sources of randomness,
ut (the efﬁcient price innovations) and qt (the trade direction indicators).
The MA(1) model has only one source of randomness, εt.
Is the existence of an MA(1) representation an important issue? Why
can’t we simply limit the analysis to the structural model, and avoid
questions of alternative representations? There are several answers. In
the ﬁrst place, the full structural model involves unobserved variables.
The econometrician observes neither the ut nor qt, so he or she doesn’t
know the efﬁcient price. The moving average representation is a useful
tool for constructing an estimate of the efﬁcient price, as well as for fore-
casting. Moreover, a moving average representation may be valid even if
the structural model is misspeciﬁed.
Fortunately, an MA(1) representation for price changes in the Roll
model does exist. In this assertion, we rely on the Wold (not Wald) theo-
rem. The Wold theorem states that any zero-mean covariance stationary
process {xt} can be represented in the form
xt =
∞

j=0
θjεt−j + κt
where {xt} is a zero-mean white noise process, θ0 = 1 (a normalization),
and ∞
j=0 θj < ∞. κt is a linearly deterministic process, which in this con-
text means that it can be predicted arbitrarily well by a linear projection
(possibly of inﬁnite order) on past observations of xt. For proofs, see
Hamilton (1994) or Sargent (1979). For a purely stochastic series, κt = 0,
and we are left with a moving average representation.
A related result due to Ansley, Spivey, and Wrobleski (1977) estab-
lishes that if a covariance stationary process has zero autocovariances at
all orders higher than K, then it possesses a moving average representation
of order K. This allows us to assert that an MA(1) representation exists for
the Roll model.
Empirical market microstructure analyses often push the Wold theo-
rem very hard. The structural models are often stylized and under-
identiﬁed (we can’t estimate all the parameters). The data are frequently
non-Gaussian (like the trade indicator variable in the Roll model). Covari-
ance stationarity of the observations (possibly after a transformation) is


UNIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANALYSIS
35
often a tenable working assumption. For many purposes, as we’ll see, it
is enough.
Section 3.4 derived the autocovariances of the Roll model (γ0 and γ1)
in terms of the structural parameters (c and σ2
u). The parameters of the
corresponding MA(1) model in Equation (4.1) are θ and σ2
ε . The MA(1) has
autocovariances γ0 = (1 + θ2)σ2
ε and γ1 = θσ2
ε . From the autocovariances (or
estimates thereof) we may compute the moving average parameters:
θ =
γ0 −

γ2
0 −4γ2
1
2γ1
and
σ2
ε =
γ0 +

γ2
0 −4γ2
1
2
(4.2)
This is actually one of two solutions, the so-called invertible solution. It
has the property that |θ| < 1, the relevance of which shortly becomes clear.
The other (noninvertible) solution is {θ∗, σ2
ε
∗}. The relation between the
two solutions is given by θ∗= 1/θ and σ2
ε
∗= θ2σ2
ε . For the noninvertible
solution, |θ∗| > 1.
4.3
Autoregressive Models
A moving average model expresses the current realization in terms of
current and lagged disturbances. These are not generally observable. For
many purposes (particularly forecasting) it is useful to express the current
realization in terms of past realizations. This leads to the autoregressive
form of the model.
To develop this for the MA(1) case, note that we can rearrange
pt = εt + θεt−1 as εt = pt −θεt−1. This gives us a backward recursion
for εt : εt−1 = pt−1 −θεt−2, εt−2 = pt−2 −θεt−3, and so forth. Using this
backward recursion gives
pt = θ

pt−1 −θ

pt−2 −θ

pt−3 −θεt−4

+ εt
= θpt−1 −θ2pt−2 + θ3pt−3 −θ4εt−4 + εt;
(4.3)
or, with inﬁnite recursion:
pt = θpt−1 −θ2pt−2 + θ3pt−3 + · · · + εt.
(4.4)
This is the autoregressive form: pt is expressed as a linear function of
its own lagged values and the current disturbance. Although the moving
average representation is of order one, the autoregressive representation
is of inﬁnite order.
If |θ| < 1, then the autoregressive representation is convergent: the
coefﬁcients of the lagged pt converge to zero. Intuitively, the effects
of lagged realizations eventually die out. When a convergent autore-
gressive representation exists, the moving average representation is said


36
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
to be invertible. Convergence is determined by the magnitude of θ.
The condition |θ| < 1 thus deﬁnes the invertible solution for the MA(1)
parameters (compare equation (4.2) and the related discussion). Hamilton
(1994, p. 64) discusses general criteria for invertibility.
To move between moving average and autoregressive representations,
it’s often convenient to use the lag operator, L (sometimes written as
the backshift operator, B). It is deﬁned by the relation Lxt = xt−1. Mul-
tiple applications work in a straightforward fashion (L2xt = xt−2, etc.).
The operator can also generate “leads” (e.g., L−3xt = xt+3). Using the lag
operator, the moving average representation for pt is pt = εt + θLεt =
(1 + θL)εt. The autoregressive representation is:
pt =

θL −θ2L2 + θ3L3 + · · ·

pt + εt.
We derived this by recursive substitution. But there is an alterna-
tive construction that is particularly useful when the model is compli-
cated. Starting from the moving average representation, we may write
(1 + θL)−1pt = εt, where we’ve essentially treated the lag operator term as
an algebraic quantity. If L were a variable and |θ| < 1, we could construct
a series expansion of the left-hand side around L = 0. This expansion,
through the third order, is [1 −θL + θ2L2 −θ3L3 + O(L4)]pt = εt, where
O(L4) represents the higher order terms. This can be rearranged to obtain
the autoregressive representation given in equations (4.4) or (4.5).
In summary, we have modeled a time series by assuming covariance
stationarity, proceeding to a moving average representation (via the Wold
theorem), and ﬁnally to the autoregressive representation. The last two
representations are equivalent, but in any particular problem, one might
be considerably simpler than the other. For example, the Roll model is a
moving average of order one, but the autoregressive representation is of
inﬁnite order.
Sometimes, though, the autoregressive representation is the sim-
pler one. An autoregressive representation of order one has the form
xt = φxt−1 + εt, or in terms of the lag operator, (1 −φL)xt = εt. The moving
average form is:
xt = (1 −φL)−1 εt =

1 + φL + φ2L2 + · · ·

εt
= εt + φεt−1 + φ2εt−2 + · · ·
Here, we have used a power series expansion of (1 + φL)−1. Recursive sub-
stitution would give the same result. The moving average representation
is of inﬁnite order.
The following exercise develops an autoregressive representation for
a persistent discretely valued series. It demonstrates the generality of the
Wold theorem by showing that such a process can be modeled using zero-
mean uncorrelated disturbances. It also illustrates the limitations of the
theorem by showing that the disturbances are dependent.


UNIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANALYSIS
37
Exercise 4.1. For the trade direction indicator qt in the Roll
model, Madhavan, Richardson, and Roomans (1997)
allow for serial dependence. Suppose that qt ∈{−1, +1}, and that
Pr (qt+1 = +1|qt = +1) = Pr (qt+1 = −1|qt = −1) = α (and, of course,
Pr (qt+1 = +1|qt = −1) = Pr (qt+1 = −1|qt = +1) = (1 −α). α is called the
continuation probability. If α = 1/2, trade directions are uncorrelated.
If 1/2 < α < 1, trade directions are persistent (buys tend to follow buys,
etc.). With this structure, qt may be expressed as the AR(1) process
qt = φqt−1 + vt where Evt = 0, Ev2
t = σ2
v, and Evtvt−k = 0 for k̸ = 0. The
model may be analyzed by constructing a table of the eight possible
realizations (paths) of (qt, qt+1, qt+2).
a. Assuming that qt is equally likely to be ±1, compute the proba-
bilities of each path. Show that φ = 2α −1.
b. Compute
vt+1
and
vt+2.
Verify
that
Evt+1 = Evt+2 = 0
and
Cov(vt+1, vt+2) = Evt+1vt+2 = 0.
c. Demonstrate that the vt values are not serially independent by
verifying that Cov(vt+1, v2
t+2)̸ = 0.
4.4
Forecasting
A crucial calculation in agents’ trading decisions is their forecast of
the security’s future value. It is convenient to construct these fore-
casts by taking expectations of MA and AR representations, but there
is an important qualiﬁcation. The assumption of covariance station-
arity sufﬁces only to characterize a restricted form of the expectation.
An expectation (e.g., E[xt|xt−1, xt−2, . . .]) generally involves the full joint
distribution f (xt, xt−1, xt−2, . . .), not just the means and covariances. Con-
siderable simpliﬁcation results, however, if we approximate the true
expectation by a linear function of the conditioning arguments, that is,
E[xt|xt−1, xt−2, . . . ] ≈α0 + α1xt−1 + α2xt−2 + · · · . This approximate expec-
tation is technically a linear projection. When the difference is important,
it will be denoted E∗to distinguish it from the true expectation. The
following material summarizes results on linear forecasting discussed at
greater length in Hamilton (1994, pp. 72–116).
The technique of linear projection is especially compatible with AR
and MA representations because the AR and MA representations have
no more and no less information than is needed to compute the projec-
tion. It is quite conceivable that a more complicated forecasting scheme,
for example, one involving nonlinear transformations of {xt−1, xt−2, . . .},
might be better (have smaller forecasting errors) than the linear projection,
but such a forecast could not be computed directly from the AR or MA
representation. More structure would be needed.
We’ll ﬁrst consider the price forecast in the Roll model. Suppose
that we know θ and have a full (inﬁnite) price history up the time t,


38
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
{pt, pt−1, pt−2, . . .}. Using the autoregressive representation, we can
recover the innovation series {εt, εt−1, εt−2, . . .}. Then:
E∗
pt+1|pt, pt−1, . . .

= E∗
εt+1 + θεt|pt, pt−1, . . .

= θεt.
(4.6)
Therefore, the forecast of next period’s price is: ft ≡E∗[pt+1|pt, pt−1, . . . ] =
pt + θεt. How does ft evolve?
ft = ft −ft−1 = pt + θεt −

pt−1 + θεt−1

= (εt + θεt−1) + θεt −θεt−1 = (1 + θ) εt.
(4.7)
That is, the forecast revision is a constant multiple of the innovation. The
innovations process is uncorrelated, so the forecast revision is as well.
Now we raise a more difﬁcult question. A martingale has uncorrelated
increments, so ft might be a martingale. Can we assert that ft = mt, that is,
have we identiﬁed the true implicit efﬁcient price? It turns out that there
is a bit of problem. If ft = mt, then pt = ft + cqt and pt = ft + cqt. But
this implies
pt = εt + θεt−1 = (1 + θ) εt + cqt ⇔−θ (εt −εt−1) = cqt.
(4.8)
In other words, all of the randomness in the model is attributable to the
qt. But this is structurally incorrect: We know that changes in the efﬁcient
price, ut, also contribute to the εt. Thus, we have not identiﬁed mt. It will
later be shown that ft = E∗[mt|pt, pt−1, . . .], that is, that ft is the projection
of mt on the conditioning variables.
Exercise 4.2 The Roll model assumes that trade directions are
serially uncorrelated: Corr(qt, qs) = 0 for t̸ = s. In practice, one often
ﬁnds positive autocorrelation (see Hasbrouck and Ho (1987) Choi,
Salandro, and Shastri (1988)). Suppose that Corr(qt, qt−1) = ρ > 0 and
Corr(qt, qt−k) = 0 for k > 1. Suppose that ρ is known.
a. Show that Var(pt) = 2c2(1 −ρ) + σ2
u, Cov(pt, pt−1) = −c2(1 −2ρ),
Cov(pt, pt−2) = −c2ρ, and Cov(pt, pt−k) = 0 for k > 2.
b. Suppose that 0 < ρ < 1 describes the true structural model. We
compute an estimate of c, denoted ˆc, assuming that the orginal
Roll model is correct. Show that ˆc < c, that is, that ˆc is biased
downward.
Exercise 4.3 The basic Roll model assumes that trade directions are
uncorrelated with changes in the efﬁcient price: Corr(qt, ut) = 0.
Suppose that Corr(qt, ut) = ρ, where ρ is known, 0 < ρ < 1. The idea
here is that a buy order is associated with an increase in the security
value, a connection that will be developed in the models of
asymmetric information. Suppose that ρ is known.


UNIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANALYSIS
39
a. Show that Var(pt) = 2c2 + σ2
u + 2cρσu, Cov(pt, pt−1) = −c(c +
ρσu), and Cov(pt, pt−k) = 0 for k > 1.
b. Suppose that 0 < ρ < 1 describes the true structural model. We
compute an estimate of c, denoted ˆc, assuming that the orginal
Roll model is correct. Show that ˆc > c, that is, that ˆc is biased
upward.
4.5
Estimation
In practice, the Roll model parameters are usually estimated as transfor-
mations of the estimated variance and ﬁrst-order autocovariance of the
price changes (see section 3.4). It is not uncommon, however, for the esti-
mated ﬁrst-order autocovariance to be positive. Harris (1990) shows that
this can easily happen due to estimation error, even though the model is
correctly speciﬁed. In these cases, Hasbrouck (2005) suggests a Bayesian
approach.
More generally, MA and AR representations can be estimated using
a wide variety of approaches. The MA parameters can be obtained from
the autocovariances (by solving the set of equations and requiring that
the solution be invertible). MA models can be estimated via maximum
likelihood (assuming a particular distribution for the disturbances). The
MA representation can also be obtained by numerically inverting the AR
representation.
The autoregressive representation can often be conveniently estimated
using ordinary least squares (OLS). The basic requirement for consistency
of OLS estimation is that the residuals are uncorrelated with the regres-
sors. This is true in equation (4.4) because the {εt} are serially uncorrelated,
and the regressors (lagged price changes) are linear functions of prior
realizations of εt. For example, pt−1 = εt−1 + θεt−2 is uncorrelated with εt.
Microstructure data often present particular challenges to statistical
software. Samples often contain embedded breaks. In a sample of intra-
day trade prices that spans multiple days, for example, the closing price
on one day and the opening price on the following day will appear succes-
sively. The overnight price change between these observations, though,
will almost certainly have different properties than the intraday price
changes. If the goal is modeling the latter, the overnight price changes
should be dropped. This is often accomplished by inserting missing values
into the series at the day breaks.
A related issue concerns lagged values realized before the start of the
sample. In an autoregression like equation (4.4), if t is the ﬁrst observation
of the sample, none of the lagged values on the right-hand side are known.
Most non-microstructure applications take the perspective that the start
of sample simply represents the beginning of the record for a process
that was already unfolding. For example, when a sample of GDP data


40
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
begins in 1900, one would assume that the economy had been up and
running prior to that date, and that 1900 merely represented the start of the
record. In other words, prior to 1900 the process was evolving unobserved.
The correct estimation approach is then unconditional, that is, the lagged
missing values are viewed as unknown but distributed in accordance with
the model. In many microstructure situations, though, the data begin right
at the start of trading process. There is no prior unobserved evolution of
the trading process. In these cases, conditional estimation, wherein the
missing lagged disturbances are set to zero, is more defensible.
4.6
Strengths and Weaknesses of Linear Time-Series Models
This chapter reviews the elements of linear time-series analysis. The
development begins with covariance stationarity, which is a plausible
and minimal working assumption in many modeling situations. Using
the Wold theorem, this leads to a moving average model, then to a vector
autoregression, and ﬁnally to a forecasting procedure. These are power-
ful results, but to maintain a balanced perspective, it is now necessary to
dwell on some of the framework’s limitations.
The characterization of a time series offered by the linear models
is not complete. The models do not fully describe the data-generating
process. They do not specify how we should computationally simulate
the process. Exercise 4.2, for example, posits ﬁrst-order autocorrela-
tion in the trade directions. We might simulate this as follows. Let
at = ut + βut−1 where ut ∼N(0, σ2
u) and 0 < β < 1. Then let qt = Sign(at),
where Sign(x) = +1 if x < 0; −1 if x < 0; and 0 if x = 0. The resulting {qt}
process is covariance stationary; we can specify AR and MA models,
identify their parameters, compute forecasts E∗[qt|qt−1, qt−2, . . .], and so
on. We can’t, however, completely reverse the inference and recover the
generating mechanism.
As demonstrated in exercise 4.1, the disturbances in MA and AR mod-
els are not serially correlated, but may be serially dependent (as mani-
fested by nonzero serial moments of order greater than two). This bears
directly on the structural interpretations of these models. The MA and AR
representations of a discretely valued process such as qt are essentially
linear models of limited dependent variables. The usual econometric
guidelines discourage such speciﬁcations on the grounds that the dis-
turbances must possess complicated and nonintuitive properties (see, for
example, Greene (2002) p. 665).
These concerns are not misplaced in the present situation if our goal is
a fully speciﬁed structural model. For example, if we believe that the
at in the generating process summarize attributes of arriving individ-
ual traders, the higher order serial dependencies will generally imply
complicated higher order dependencies in the attributes of successively


UNIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANALYSIS
41
arriving individuals. Rather than model this behavior, it is usually easier
to specify a statistical model (such as a logit or probit) for which these
features are not needed.
Logit and probit models are certainly part of the microstructure toolbox.
We do not, however, use them reﬂexively simply because some variables
of interest happen to be discrete. They are more complicated than linear
speciﬁcations, and so are more demanding in programming and computa-
tion. A larger consideration is that there may be other structural features
that are more important than discreteness. Probably paramount among
these other concerns is time-varying and persistent volatility.
Even in light of these remarks, linear time-series analysis nevertheless
retains strength and utility. It provides logically coherent and computa-
tionally simple tools for describing ﬁrst-order dynamics, forecasting, and
forming expectations. The underlying assumptions are minimal (chieﬂy
covariance stationarity), so the analyses may be more robust to misspeci-
ﬁcation than more reﬁned models. The representations are compatible
with a wide range of structural models and so are relatively easy to illus-
trate and interpret. In short, they are useful aids in developing intuitions
of how ﬁnancial markets work.


5
Sequential Trade Models
5.1
Overview
In the Roll framework, everyone possesses the same information. New
public information can cause the quotes to change, but trades have no
impact. Because trades are not informative, there’s no particular need
for them to be reported and disseminated in a timely fashion. Trading is
not a strategic problem because agents always face the same spread. The
costs reﬂected in dealers’ spreads reﬂect only expenditures for computers,
communications, salaries, business fees, and so on, the sort of expenses
that a wholesaler of any good or service might incur.
Although some securities markets might function this way some of the
time, most work very differently. Trade reports are valuable information.
Orders appear to move prices. Spreads vary across markets and with mar-
ket conditions. Of course, trading strategies must reﬂect these realities.
It turns out that dropping the assumption of uniform information opens
the door for sensible economic explanations for these features of mar-
ket behavior. The asymmetric information models described in this and
following chapters take this direction.
These models have the following general features. The security payoff
is usually of a common value nature. The primary beneﬁt derived from
ownership of the security is the resale value or terminal liquidating divi-
dend that is the same for all holders. But for trade to exist, we also need
private value components, that is, diversiﬁcation or risk exposure needs
that are idiosyncratic to each agent. The private values are often mod-
eled in an ad hoc fashion. Sometimes we simply assert the existence of
unspeciﬁed private values that generate the assumed behavior.
42


SEQUENTIAL TRADE MODELS
43
Generally, public information initially consists of common knowledge
concerning the probability structure of the economy, in particular the
unconditional distribution of terminal security value and the distribu-
tion of types of agents. As trading unfolds, the most important updates
to the public information set are market data, such as bids, asks, and the
prices and volumes of trades. Many of the models make no provision for
the arrival of nontrade public information (e.g., news announcements)
during trading. Private information may consist of a signal about termi-
nal security value, or more commonly, perfect knowledge of the terminal
security value.
When all agents are ex ante identical, they are said to be symmetric.
This does not rule out private values or private information. It simply
means that all individual-speciﬁc variables (e.g., the coefﬁcient of risk
aversion, a value signal) are identically distributed across all partici-
pants. In an asymmetric information model, some subset of the agents
has superior private information.
The majority of the asymmetric information models in microstructure
examine market dynamics subject to a single source of uncertainty, that
is, a single information event. At the end of trading, the security payoff
(terminal value) is realized and known. Thus, the trading process is an
adjustment from one well-deﬁned information set to another. From a sta-
tistical perspective, the dynamics of this adjustment are neither stationary
nor ergodic. The dynamics are not time-homogenous, although path real-
izations can be sequentially stacked to provide a semblance of ongoing
trading.
Theoretical market microstructure has two main sorts of asymmetric
information models. In the sequential trade models, randomly selected
traders arrive at the market singly, sequentially, and independently. Key
early references along this line of inquiry include Copeland and Galai
(1983) and Glosten and Milgrom (1985). The other class of models usu-
ally features a single informed agent who can trade at multiple times.
Following O’Hara (1995), we’ll describe these as strategic trader models.
When an individual trader only participates in the market once (as in the
sequential trade models), there is no need for her to take into account
the effect her actions might have on subsequent decisions of others. A
trader who revisits the market, however, must make such calculations,
and they involve considerations of strategy. This second class of models
is also sometimes described as continuous auction, but the continuity of
the market is not really an essential feature. This line of thought begins
with Kyle (1985).
The essential feature of both models is that a trade reveals something
about the agent’s private information. A “buy” from the dealer might result
from a trader who has private positive information, but it won’t originate
from a trader who has private negative information. Rational, competitive
market makers will set their bid and ask quotes accordingly. All else equal,


44
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
more extreme information asymmetries lead to wider quotes. Trades will
also engender a “permanent” impact on subsequent prices. The spread
and trade-impact effects are the principal empirical implications of these
models. We begin with the sequential trade models.
5.2
A Simple Sequential Trade Model
The essential sequential trade model is a simple construct. The model
presented here is a special case of Glosten and Milgrom (1985). It is also
contained as a special case in many other analyses. There is one security
with a value (payoff) V that is either high or low, V or V. The prob-
ability of the low outcome is δ. The value is revealed after the market
closes. It is not, however, affected by trading. It is determined, by a ran-
dom draw of nature, prior to the market open. The trading population (the
customers) comprises informed and uninformed traders. Informed traders
(insiders) know the value outcome. The proportion of informed traders in
the population is µ.
A dealer posts bid and ask quotes, B and A. A trader is drawn at ran-
dom from the population. If the trader is informed, she buys if V = V and
sells if V = V. If the trader is uninformed, he buys or sells randomly and
with equal probability. The dealer does not know whether the trader is
informed. The event tree for the ﬁrst trade is given in ﬁgure 5.1.
In the ﬁgure, I and U denote the arrivals of informed and uninformed
traders. A buy is a purchase by the customer at the dealer’s ask price, A;
a sell is a customer sale at the bid. The value attached to the arrow is the
probability of the indicated transition. Total probabilities are obtained by
Figure 5.1.
The event tree for the basic
sequential trade model.


SEQUENTIAL TRADE MODELS
45
multiplying along a path. For example, the probability of a low realiza-
tion for V, followed by a the arrival of an uninformed trader who buys
is δ(1 −µ)/2. The sum of the total probabilities over terminal Buy nodes
gives the unconditional probability of a buy: Pr(Buy) = (1 + µ(1 −2δ))/2.
Similarly, Pr(Sell) = (1 −µ)(1 −2δ))/2. In the case where δ = 1/2 (equal
probabilities of good and bad outcomes), the buy and sell probabilities
are also equal.
Now consider the dealer’s situation. The purchases and sales of the
uninformed traders are not sensitive to the quoted bid or ask. So if the
dealer is a monopolist, expected proﬁts are maximized by setting the bid
inﬁnitely low and the ask inﬁnitely high. Obviously, at these prices, only
the uninformed trade. In practice, the dealer’s market power is constrained
by competition and regulation. Competition arises from other dealers, but
also and more generally from anyone who is setting a visible quote, such
as a public customer using a limit order. In some venues, regulation limits
the dealers’ power. For example, NASD’s Rules of Fair Practice (Article
III, Section IV) generally prohibit markups (sale price over purchase price)
in excess of 5%.
We’ll assume that competition among dealers drives expected proﬁts to
zero. Furthermore, for the usual reasons, the dealer can’t cross-subsidize
buys with sells or vice versa. (If he were making a proﬁt selling to cus-
tomers, for example, another dealer would undercut his ask.) It thus
sufﬁces to consider buys and sells separately.
The dealer’s inference given that the ﬁrst trade is a buy or sell can be
summarized by her revised beliefs about the probability of a low outcome,
denoted δ1( · ). Given that the customer buys, this probability is
δ1(Buy) = Pr(V|Buy) = Pr(V, Buy)
Pr(Buy)
=
δ(1 −µ)
1 + µ(1 −2δ).
(5.1)
Because µ and δ are between zero and one, ∂δ1(Buy)/∂µ < 0: The revi-
sion in beliefs is stronger when there are more informed traders in the
population.
At the end of the day, the dealer’s realized proﬁt on the transaction
is π = A −V. Immediately after the trade, the dealer’s expectation of
this proﬁt is E[π|Buy] = A −E[V|Buy], where E[V|Buy] = δ1(Buy)V +
(1 −δ1(Buy))V. If competition drives this expected proﬁt to zero, then
A = E[V|Buy] = V(1 −µ) δ + V (1 −δ)(1 + µ)
1 −µ(1 −2δ)
.
(5.2)
A dealer’s quote is essentially a proposal of terms of trade. When the bid
is hit or the offer is lifted, this proposal has been accepted. In some trading
situations, such an acceptance induces dismay. Depending on the context,
this is variously termed the winner’s curse, ex post regret, or (in the real
estate market) buyer’s remorse. In the present model, however, the ask is


46
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
simply what the dealer believes the security to be worth. Ex post regret
does not arise. The quote is regret-free.
The ask quote strikes a balance between informed and uninformed
traders. The conditional expectation of value can be decomposed as
E[V|Buy] = E[V|U, Buy]Pr(U|Buy) + E[V|I, Buy]Pr(I|Buy).
(5.3)
Substituting this into the zero-expected proﬁt condition A = E[V|Buy] and
rearranging gives:
(A −E[V|U, Buy])
	



Gain from an
uninformed trader
Pr(U|Buy) = −(A −E[V|I, Buy])
	



Loss to an
informed trader
Pr(I|Buy)
(5.4)
The expected gains from uninformed traders are balanced by the losses to
informed traders. In this model, therefore, there is a net wealth transfer
from uninformed to informed traders.
The analysis for the dealer’s bid is similar. Following a sale to the
dealer,
δ1(Sell) = Pr(V|Sell) = Pr(V, Sell)
Pr(Sell)
=
δ(1 + µ)
1 −(1 −2δ)µ.
(5.5)
For δ and µ between zero and one, δ1(Sell) > δ1(Buy). V is less likely if the
customer bought, reasons the dealer, because an informed customer who
knew V = V would have sold. Furthermore ∂δ1(Sell)/∂µ > 0. The dealer’s
bid is set as
B = E[V|Sell] = V(1 + µ) δ + V (1 −µ)(1 −δ)
1 + µ(1 −2δ)
.
(5.6)
The bid-ask spread is
A −B = 4(1 −δ)δµ(V −V)
1 −(1 −2δ)2µ2
.
(5.7)
In the symmetric case of δ = 1/2, A −B = (V −V )µ.
In many situations the midpoint of the bid and ask is taken as a proxy
for what the security is worth absent transaction costs. Here, the midpoint
is equal to the unconditional expectation EV only in the symmetric case
(δ = 1/2). More generally, the bid and ask are not set symmetrically about
the efﬁcient price.
Exercise 5.1 As a modiﬁcation to the basic model, take δ = 1/2
and suppose that immediately after V is drawn (as either V or V),
a broker is randomly drawn. The probability of an informed trader
within broker b’s customer set is µb. Other brokers have proportion


SEQUENTIAL TRADE MODELS
47
µ∼b, with µb < µ∼b. Quote setters post bids and asks. If the order
comes into broker b, however, he has option to trade against the
customer by matching the bid or ask set by the other dealers.
Show that broker b’s expected proﬁts on a customer buy order
are (V −V )(µ∼b −µb)/2 > 0.
Exercise 5.2 Consider a variant of the model in which there is
informed trading only in the low state (V = V). Verify that
δ1(Buy) = δ(1 −µ)
1 −δµ ;
δ1(Sell) = δ(1 + µ)
1 + δµ
Ask = V(1 −δ) + Vδ(1 −µ)
1 −δµ
;
Bid = V(1 −δ) + Vδ(1 + µ)
1 + δµ
.
Exercise 5.3 Consider a variant of the model in which informed
traders only receive a signal S about V. The signal can be either low or
high: S ∈{S, S}. The accuracy of the signal is γ : Pr[S|V] = Pr[S|V] = γ.
Informed traders always trade in the direction of their signal. Show
that δ(Buy) = [δ1(1 −(2γ −1)µ)]/[1 −(2γ −1)(2δ −1)µ].
5.3
Market Dynamics: Bid and Ask Quotes over Time
After the initial trade, the dealer updates his beliefs and posts new quotes.
The next trader arrives, and the process repeats. This recurrence is clearest
in the expressions for δ(Buy) and δ(Sell) in Eqs. (5.1) and (5.5). These
equations map a prior probability (the δ in the right-hand side) into a
posterior probability based on the direction of the trade. Let δk denote the
probability of a low outcome given δk −1 and the direction of the kth trade,
with the original (unconditional) probability being δ0 ≡δ. Then Eqs. (5.1)
and (5.5) can be generalized as
δk(Buyk; δk−1) =
δk−1(1 −µ)
1 + µ(1 −2δk−1) and
δk(Sellk; δk−1) =
δk−1(1 + µ)
1 −(1 −2δk−1)µ.
(5.8)
The updating recursion can be expressed in general form because all
probabilities in the event tree except δ are constant over time.
Exercise 5.4 The δk following a sequence of orders can be
expressed recursively as δk(Order1, Order2, . . . , Orderk) = δk(Orderk;
δk −1 (Orderk −1; δk −2(Orderk −2; . . . ))). Verify that δ2(Sell1, Buy2) = δ.
That is, offsetting trades are uninformative.


48
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Market dynamics have the following features:
• The trade price series is a martingale. Recall from the foregoing
analysis that Bk = E[V|Sellk] and Ak = E[V|Buyk]. Because the
trade occurs at one or the other of these prices, the sequence
of trade prices {Pk} is a sequence of conditional expectations
E[V|k] where k is the information set consisting of the history
(including the kth trade) of the buy/sell directions. A sequence
of expectations conditioned on expanding information sets is a
martingale.
• The order ﬂow is not symmetric. Using qk to denote the trade
direction as we did in the Roll model (+1 for a buy, −1 for a sell),
E[qk|k −1] is in general nonzero.
• The spread declines over time. Knowing the long-run proportion
of buys and sells in the order ﬂow is tantamount to knowing the
outcome. With each trade, the dealer can estimate this proportion
more precisely, and hence uncertainty is reduced.
• The orders are serially correlated. Although the agents are drawn
independently, one subset of the population (the informed
traders) always trades in the same direction.
• There is a price impact of trades. For any given pattern of buys and
sells through trade k, a buy on the k + 1 trade causes a downward
revision in the conditional probability of a low outcome, and a
consequent increase in the bid and ask. The trade price impact
is a particularly useful empirical implication of the model. It can
be estimated from market data and is plausibly a useful proxy for
information asymmetries.
5.4
Extensions
The sequential trade framework is a modeling platform that is easily
extended to accommodate various features of trading. The following
subsections describe some of these developments.
5.4.1
Quote Matching
To this point the information asymmetries in the model have centered on
fundamental value. Superior information concerning a security’s payoffs
certainly bestows an economic advantage. But this is not the only sort
of information differential that can arise. En route to the market nexus,
most orders pass through brokers or other intermediaries, whose rela-
tionships with the order submitters may convey advantage. Brokers, for
example, usually possess trading history, credit scores and other sorts
of client data. If their assessment of the likelihood that the customer
is informed, conditional on customer identity, is lower than the like-
lihood for other brokers, they may proﬁtably trade against their own


SEQUENTIAL TRADE MODELS
49
customers if this is permitted. Exercise 5.1 describes a stylized model
of this behavior.
This model can be considered at best a partial equilibrium. Why do
broker b’s customers include more sheep and fewer wolves? Why can’t
other brokers attract a similar customer base? The model nevertheless
illustrates a nonfundamental informational advantage. This is an impor-
tant point because although information asymmetries related to value
are quite plausible in some markets, they are more dubious in others. In
equity markets, for example, advance knowledge of an earnings surprise,
takeover announcement, or similar event confers an obvious advantage.
Similar events do not, however, characterize the government bond and
foreign exchange markets. Models of these markets, therefore, must rely
on a broader concept of private information. This important point has
been stressed by Lyons (2001).
5.4.2
Fixed Transaction Costs
Suppose that in addition to asymmetric information considerations, the
dealer must pay a transaction cost c on each trade (as in the Roll model).
The modiﬁcation is straightforward. The ask and bid now are set to recover
c as well as the information costs: A = E[V|Buy] + c and B = E[V|Sell] −c.
The ask quote sequence may still be expressed as a sequence of condi-
tional expectations: Ak = E[V|k] + c, where k is the information set
that includes the direction of the kth trade. Therefore the ask sequence
is a martingale. So, too, is the bid sequence. Because trades can occur
at either the bid or the ask, however, the sequence of trade prices is not
a martingale (due to the ± c asymmetry in the problem). In terms of the
original Roll model, the effect of asymmetric information is to break the
independence between trade direction qt and the innovation to the efﬁ-
cient price ut. Developments along these lines are discussed in Glosten
and Milgrom (1985, p. 83).
5.4.3
Price-Sensitive Liquidity Traders and Market Failures
The uninformed traders in the basic model are, if not necessarily stupid,
then at least rather simple. They aren’t price sensitive: Their trading
demands are inelastic. If they have to buy, they’ll pay the ask without
reservation. Such desperation does exist, but it is not the rule. Most
traders, even if driven by private value considerations, are somewhat price
sensitive.
The traders (both informed and uninformed) in Glosten and Milgrom
(1985) are actually modeled as agents subject to a random utility,
U = ρxV + C, in their notation. Here, ρ is the rate of substitution between
current and future (terminal date) consumption, x is the number of shares
held at the payoff date, and C is current consumption. ρ is random across


50
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
traders, and its distribution is common knowledge. High ρ implies a strong
preference for future consumption and therefore (other things equal), a
tendency to buy the security. The dealer’s ρ is normalized to unity. The
price of current consumption may also be normalized to unity.
Initially for an uninformed trader EU = ρxEV + C. He will buy (paying
the dealer’s ask price A) if ρEV > A. He will sell (at the dealer’s bid price B)
if ρEV < B. If B < ρEV < A, the agent won’t trade. (In the present model,
a nontrade event is uninformative. When there is event uncertainty, a
nontrade may be informative. This point is developed shortly.)
With inelastic uninformed trading demands, the dealer can set the
bid and ask as wide as necessary to cover her losses to the informed
traders. With elastic demands, though, there will generally be fewer unin-
formed agents willing to trade as these prices. The zero-expected-proﬁt
equilibrium will generally therefore exhibit a wider spread than in the
inelastic case.
It is also possible that there exist no bid and ask values (other than B = V
and A = V) at which the dealer’s expected proﬁt is nonnegative. That is,
the uninformed traders are so price sensitive that they are unwilling to
participate in sufﬁcient number to cover the dealer’s losses to the informed
traders (Glosten and Milgrom 1985, p. 84). Agents trying to access the
market bid and ask quotes see a blank screen. This is a market failure.
The market failure can be repaired by information dissemination that
removes the asymmetry or requiring the dealer to trade at a loss (pre-
sumably to be offset by some other beneﬁt or concession). In fact, both
do occur. Trading often stops (or is ofﬁcially halted) pending a major
news announcement. Exchanges, dealer associations, and simple consid-
erations of reputation often effectively force a dealer to maintain a market
presence when he would prefer to withdraw.
This is a point of considerable social and regulatory importance.
Though coverage and enforcement varies widely, most countries now
have laws that prohibit insider trading. These prohibitions are grounded
in considerations of fairness and economic efﬁciency. The economic
efﬁciency argument holds that market failures are extremely costly for
the uninformed traders, who are denied the gains from trade (such as
improved risk sharing, etc.).
5.4.4
Event Uncertainty
In actual security markets, information and information asymmetries
often arrive in a lumpy fashion. Long periods with no new information
and steady or sluggish trading are punctuated by periods of extremely
active trading before, during, and after major news announcements.
Easley and O’Hara (1992) model this variation using event uncertainty.
Taking the basic model as the starting point, a random step is placed at
the beginning of the day: whether an information event has occurred.


SEQUENTIAL TRADE MODELS
51
Figure 5.2.
Event tree at the start of the day.
Figure 5.2 depicts the new event tree. Besides the random occurrence
of information events, the tree also features an additional type of trader
action: no trade. For “no trade” to convey useful information, it must
be observable. In the empirical implementation discussed in the next
chapter, “no trade” will be reinterpreted as something more akin to “slow
trade.” In the present context, though, it is most straightforward to envi-
sion a market where agents physically approach the dealer and then
decide whether to trade.
The updating of dealers beliefs is fairly intuitive. A customer buy might
arise from an informed buyer, and so increases the conditional probability
of V; a customer sale increases the perceived likelihood of V. A no-trade
event decreases the dealer’s conditional belief that an information event
has occurred. Because information asymmetries can only arise subsequent
to an information event, the dealer’s perceived cost of informed trading
drops after a no-trade event, and the spread narrows. This implication of
the model has inﬂuenced empirical work.
An informed trader always trades (in the direction of her knowledge).
An uninformed trader might not trade. The no-trade probabilities for unin-
formed agents are the same whether an information event has occured or
not, but the proportion of uninformed traders in the customer mix is higher
in the absence of an information event. To the dealer, therefore, absence
of trade suggests a decreased likelihood of an information event.
5.4.5
Orders of Different Sizes
The basic sequential trade model has one trade quantity. Trades in real
markets, of course, occur in varying quantities. Easley and O’Hara (1987)
present a framework similar to that used in the last section. Their model
features event uncertainty and two possible order sizes. The market maker


52
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
posts one set of bid and ask quotes for small trades and another set for large
trades.
The most challenging aspect of model construction is the requirement
that the zero-expected-proﬁt condition must hold for all quantities and
directions. Expected losses on large buy orders, for example, can’t be
cross-subsidized by expected proﬁts on small sell orders.
In the models considered to this point, all trades in which the mar-
ket maker might participate have some nonzero probability of involving
an uninformed trader. This is a pooling feature of the trade mix. Were
some class of trades to involve only informed traders (and therefore cer-
tain losses), no bid and ask prices (except V and V) would be possible.
Such outcomes are “separating.” Informed traders maximize their pro-
ﬁts by trading in the largest possible size. For a pooling equilibrium to
exist, large orders must have some chance of originating from uninformed
traders. A pooling equilibrium is also contingent on the existence of event
uncertainty.
5.4.6
Orders of Different Types
The only orders permissible to this point have been marketable ones—
orders that would result in an immediate execution. Real-world security
markets admit a much wider range. Many of the variations arise when
a customer has a trading strategy that can be codiﬁed in a simple rule,
that when communicated with the order avoids the necessity for further
monitoring or modiﬁcation on the customer’s part.
One common variant is the price-contingent order. When used to sell,
these are called stop-loss orders. When the trade price hits or drops
through a preset barrier, the order becomes marketable. For example, con-
sider a stop-loss order to sell triggered (“elected”) at a price of 50. When
the trade price reaches 50, this is converted into a market order. Note that
actual execution price for this order may well be below 50 if the market is
moving quickly. There are also buy-stop orders, which become marketable
when the price rises through a preset barrier.
Easley and O’Hara (1991) analyze a sequential trade model where the
market accepts stop orders. The main implications of the model are as
follows. Informed traders will never use stop orders. The information con-
tent of prices declines (the market becomes less informationally efﬁcient).
There is a greater probability of large price changes. In the model (and in
real markets), a trade can trigger a wave of elections.
5.5
Empirical Implications
This book’s presentation of information asymmetry focuses on its role in
trading situations. More broadly, though, asymmetric information ﬁgures


SEQUENTIAL TRADE MODELS
53
prominently in many models of corporate ﬁnance and asset pricing. The
sequential trade models (and others to follow) establish a connection
between information asymmetries and observable market phenomena.
The construction of proxies for the former via empirical analysis of the
latter ranks as one of the most important goals of empirical microstructure
research.
In the model of section 5.2, the structural asymmetric information
parameter is µ (the proportion of informed traders in the population). µ is
positively related to both the bid-ask spread and the revision in beliefs
(compare Eqs. (5.7) and (5.1)). These results suggest use of the bid-ask
spread or the impact an order has on subsequent prices as proxies for
asymmetric information. Although it is often most convenient to measure
the spread, the spread impounds noninformational costs (c in the Roll
model) and inventory effects (discussed in chapter 11). Price impact, on
the other hand, must be estimated from models of the joint dynamics of
orders and prices. These speciﬁcations are discussed in later chapters,
but the general character of the effect is sufﬁciently important to warrant
immediate elaboration.
5.6
Price Impact
Price impact refers to the effect of an incoming order on subsequent prices.
The term carries connotations of a mechanism that is forceful and direct.
In fact, the process is complex and subtle. It involves signal extraction
mediated through the forces of economic competition.
Signal extraction entails learning about an unknown (in this case,
value) from conditioning information consisting of indirect or noisy obser-
vations (the trades). Put another way, the dealer’s key inference is a
prediction of the closing revelation of true value based on the order ﬂow.
This prediction per se does not fully account for the revision of the bid
and ask, however. For the prediction to be fully reﬂected in the quotes,
there must be other dealers, who also observe the trade, and who will
compete away any attempt by any other dealer to extract a proﬁt by set-
ting an inferior bid or ask. To take an extreme example, a monopolist
dealer could possibly set B = V + ε and A = V −ε for some trivial ε > 0,
irrespective of prior orders. The order ﬂow and (therefore) the dealer’s
beliefs about V would evolve exactly as in the competitive case, but with
no price changes.
In this light, orders do not “impact” prices. It is more accurate to say
the orders forecast prices. The distinction is important, but empirical res-
olution is difﬁcult. “Functional” causality and forecast enhancement are
generally indistinguishable. The usual (Granger-Sims) test for causality is
implemented as a test of forecasting ability (Hamilton (1994) p. 302).


54
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Focusing on the signal extraction process leads to interesting impli-
cations. Most important, market dynamics reﬂect the beliefs of market
participants, not necessarily the reality. In particular, µ is the dealers’
belief about the likelihood of an informed trader. If we subsequently deter-
mine that on a particular day a corporate insider had been illegally trading
in the market, we are in a position to assert that the actual likelihood of
an informed trade on that day was higher than what the dealers believed.
It is the latter beliefs, however, that determine the price reaction. Absent
any changes in these beliefs, we should not expect an empirical analysis
to detect any elevation in the price impact.
A trade causes a revision in the expectation of V for all agents in the
market, with the important exception of the agent who actually traded.
This customer has no better information than he did before the trade. This
is clearly the case for an informed trader, who possesses perfect knowl-
edge. But it is also true of an uninformed trader. The uninformed trader
who completes transaction k knows that the probability of informed trader
on that trade is not µ but zero. For this trader, then, δk = δk −1. Whether
informed or uninformed, the agent’s ultimate effect of his trades is suc-
cinctly summarized in the aphorism, “The stock doesn’t know that you
own it” (Goodman 1967).
Alternatively the expectation of terminal value conditional on one’s
own contemplated trades does not depend on whether the trades are actu-
ally completed. For example, if the incoming order is a purchase by an
unidentiﬁed agent, everyone in the market will revise upward their expec-
tation of the terminal security value, except for the agent who actually sent
in the order.1
In a sense, the trading process creates superior information for unin-
formed traders. From the perspective of an uninformed agent who has just
made the kth trade, the dealers’ subsequent quote revisions are erroneous.
Once the trade is completed, any uninformed trader possesses information
superior to the dealers.
Does this create a manipulation opportunity? It is difﬁcult to generally
characterize market manipulations, but one strategy that might be offered
up in example involves buying, moving the price upward in the process,
and selling at the higher price. Traders in the basic model have only one
chance to buy or sell, so there is no possibility of any such round-trip. But
suppose that this limitation is removed, and we let an uninformed buyer
immediately return to the market. Can he reverse his trade at a proﬁt? (As
an exercise, verify that the answer is “no.”)
It is clear, however, that a sequence of uninformed trades in the
same direction will move the market’s conditional assessment of δ. This
may create a proﬁt opportunity for an agent who knows that the trades
were uninformed, even though the agent is ignorant of the fundamental
value information. Suppose that the ﬁrst two trades are uninformed sells.
The ask quote preceding the third trade is set to reﬂect the updated δ:


SEQUENTIAL TRADE MODELS
55
δ3(Sell1, Sell2, Buy3) = δ(1 + µ)/[1 + (2δ −1)µ] > δ0.
It therefore follows that EV −Ask3 > 0, where EV = δ0V + (1 + δ0)V,
the unconditional expectation. Knowing that all trades to this point
(including his own) have been uninformed (ignorant of the true V), EV is
also the buyer’s conditional expectation. In buying at the ask, he is paying
less than the security is worth.
What sort of agent might have the information required to behave in
this fashion? Orders typically reach a market through agents (brokers).
Brokers typically know something about their customers, and so may be
in a good position to judge if someone is uninformed. Trading ahead of
your customer is generally prohibited, but the strategy described only
requires trading after the customer.


6
Order Flow and the Probability
of Informed Trading
Though the richest implications of the sequential trade models involve
the joint dynamics of trades and prices, inference can also be based solely
on the order arrival process. This chapter describes the procedure. First,
to illustrate the general features of the problem, we examine the statis-
tical properties of the numbers of buys and sells from the basic sequential
trade model. We next turn to a more ﬂexible model that allows for event
uncertainty. The analysis is based on Easley, Kiefer, and O’Hara (1997)
and Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2002).
6.1
The Distribution of Buys and Sells
For the model described in section 5.2 the probabilities of a buy order
conditional on low and high outcomes are Pr(Buy|V ) = (1 −µ)/2 and
Pr(Buy|V) = (1 + µ)/2. These probabilities are constant over successive
trades. Also, conditional on V, order directions are serially independent:
The probability of a buy does not depend on the direction of the last or
any prior orders. If we observe n trades, the conditional distributions of b
buys, Pr(b|n, V ) and Pr(b|n, V), are binomial:
Pr(b|n, V) = pb(1 −p)n−b

n
b

where p =

(1 −µ)/2
if V = V
(1 + µ)/2
if V = V.
(6.1)
The number of buys conditional only on n, then, is a mixture of binomials:
Pr (b|n) = δ Pr (b|n, V ) + (1 −δ) Pr (b|n, V ).
(6.2)
56


ORDER FLOW AND THE PROBABILITY OF INFORMED TRADING
57
Figure 6.1.
Distribution of the number of buy orders.
With no informed trading, the distribution is approximately normal. As
it increases, the component distributions become more distinct. With
µ = 0.1, the distribution is broader but still unimodal. With µ = 0.5, the
distribution is bimodal (see ﬁgure 6.1).
This suggests the properties of the data that will identify an estimate
of µ. With high µ, all days will tend to have one-sided order ﬂow, a
preponderance of buys or sells, depending on the outcome of the value
draw. Although this model could be estimated by maximum likelihood,
actual applications are based on a modiﬁed version, described in the next
section.
6.2
Event Uncertainty and Poisson Arrivals
This model is a variation of the sequential trade model with event uncer-
tainty (section 5.4.4). The principal difference is that agents are not
sequentially drawn in discrete time but arrive randomly in continuous
time.
These events are modeled as a Poisson arrival process. Speciﬁcally,
suppose that the traders arrive randomly in time such that the probability
of an arrival in a time interval of length t is λt where λ is the arrival
intensity per unit time, and the probability of two traders arriving in the
same interval goes to zero in the limit as t →0. Then,
• The number of trades in any ﬁnite interval of length t is
Poisson with parameter θ = λt. (The Poisson distribution for a
random variable n with parameter θ has the form Pr (n) = e−θθn/n!
for n = 0, 1, . . . The mean and variance of this distribution are
En = Var(n) = θ.)
• The duration τ between two successive arrivals is exponentially
distributed: f (τ) = τe−λτ.


58
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Figure 6.2.
Sequential trade model with event
uncertainty and Poisson arrivals.
• If two types of traders arrive independently with intensities λ1
and λ2, then the arrival intensity for undifferentiated traders, that
is, traders of any type, is λ1 + λ2.
See Ross (1996, pp. 59–65).
The arrival intensities for informed and uninformed traders are µ and ε.
The effect of these parameters on the arrival intensities of buyers and
sellers depends on the information state of the market. Figure 6.2 depicts
this dependence. In all states, uninformed buyers and sellers arrive with
intensity ε. If there is an information event that results in a low value
realization, for example, informed sellers appear, the total arrival intensity
of sellers is ε + µ.
On any day the unconditional numbers of buys and sells are jointly
distributed as a Poisson mixture:
Pr(b, s) = (1 −α)Pr(b; ε)Pr(s; ε)
+ α

δPr(b; ε)Pr(s; µ + ε) + (1 −δ)Pr(b; µ + ε)Pr(s; εx)

,
(6.3)
where Pr(n; λ) denotes the probability of n arrivals when λ is the inten-
sity parameter. Figure 6.3 depicts this distribution for parameter values
α = 0.4, µ = ε = 10, (per day). The ﬁgure depicts the distribution both as a
contour map (with elevation corresponding to probability) and in three
dimensions (with probability on the vertical axis). In both depictions it is
clear that the dominant features are two lobes, corresponding to the days
when the order ﬂow tends to be one-sided.
Pr(b, s) from equation (6.3) can be used to construct a sample likelihood
function. (Note that the buys and sells do not enter individually. The only
thing that matters is the total number on a given day.) All parameters may
be estimated by maximum likelihood. Most interest, however, centers on
a transformation of the parameters that corresponds to the probability of
informed trading (PIN). This may be developed as follows.
The expected total order arrival intensity is 2ε + αµ, consisting of unin-
formed buyers, uninformed sellers, and (with probability α) informed
traders. PIN is the unconditional probability that a randomly chosen
trader on a randomly chosen day is informed. Thus,
PIN = αµ/(αµ + 2ε).
(6.4)


ORDER FLOW AND THE PROBABILITY OF INFORMED TRADING
59
Figure 6.3.
Joint probability density for the number of buy and sell
orders.
In the basic model, the probability of an informed trader is µ. This can
be obtained as a special case of the present model.1 When µ increases in
the basic model, daily order ﬂows became increasingly one-sided (com-
pare ﬁgure 6.1). This is also true in the present model: An increase in PIN
will lead to more pronounced lobes in ﬁgure 6.3.
There interplay between α and µ in this model is interesting. These
parameters enter into PIN only as the product αµ, and so can offset each
other. We can obtain similar probability distributions for buys and sells
whether informed traders are many (high µ) and information events are
infrequent (low α) or informed traders are few (low µ) and information
events are frequent (high α). This is important for estimation. Order one-
sidedness in a sample may yield a relatively precise estimate for PIN.
Samples are typically less informative about µ and α individually. Esti-
mation errors in these two parameters are usually strongly negatively
correlated. If we are primarily interested in PIN, though, this impreci-
sion in the component parameters is a lesser concern. Moreover, PIN can
be constant over days even when there is variation in µ and α, as long as
it is offsetting. Thus, PIN might be stable even when high-µ/low-α days
are interspersed with low-µ/high-α days.
6.3
Discussion
Although the expanded model is more realistic than the simple version,
it remains highly stylized. Information events that can occur at most once
per day, events that always occur at the beginning of the day, two pos-
sible value realizations, etc., seem to push this model far away from
anything that might be found in reality. As a result, it is probably a
mistake to take the model’s estimates too literally. The details of PIN’s


60
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
construction, though, suggest that it is a meaningful measure of order ﬂow
one-sidedness. There are certainly situations in securities markets where
this is sensibly related to information. If public news announcements, for
example, diffuse slowly, traders who can react before others may send
in orders to hit or lift quotes that are, given the new information, stale.
Until the stale quotes are eliminated, order ﬂow will be one-sided. More
broadly, order ﬂow may be one-sided in a stock with poor liquidity due
to order fragmentation. PIN may well pick up cross-sectional variation in
these mechanisms.
Although we have described the computation of PIN as an estimate
that falls out of a sequential trade model, its origins are somewhat more
modest. The economic content of a sequential trade model lies in its pre-
dictions about the joint dynamics of orders and prices, for example, the
effect of the orders on the quote midpoint and the spread, neither of
which directly affects PIN. PIN is determined solely by the order
arrival processes. These processes, though certainly reasonable, are model
assumptions rather than model predictions.
The obvious difference between the Roll and the sequential trade mod-
els is that the former focuses on price and the latter on orders. There is
also, however, a profound difference in how the time series are viewed.
The Roll model exists in a covariance stationary framework, where infor-
mation arrives uniformly and all relevant probability distributions are
time-invariant.
The setup in the sequential trade models, though, is neither stationary
nor ergodic. Stationarity is violated, for example, because even before the
day begins, we know that the distribution of the spread immediately prior
to the tenth trade differs from that prior to the ninth trade. Ergodicity is
violated because successive probabilities of buys, for example, always
depend on the outcome of the initial value draw.
The dynamics of the sequential trade model resemble an adjustment
process subsequent to a shock. This might be most accurate, for example,
in modeling trading leading up to a signiﬁcant prescheduled corporate
news announcement. The covariance stationary framework of the Roll
model, on the other hand, would conform more closely to an aver-
age trading day in which diverse information arrives continually during
the day.
These differences also arise in estimation. The maximum likelihood
estimate of PIN relies on a sample consisting of independent path real-
izations. We assume that an initial draw is made at the beginning of the
day (literally) and that the process starts anew each day. Then the sample
proportions of buys on different days are independent and inference can
proceed.


7
Strategic Trade Models
In the sequential trade framework, there are many informed agents, but
each can trade only once and only if he or she is “drawn” as the arriving
trader. Furthermore, if order size is a choice variable, the informed agent
will always trade the largest quantity. The Kyle (1985) model, discussed
in this chapter, differs in both respects. In the Kyle model, there is a single
informed trader who behaves strategically. She sets her trade size taking
into account the adverse price concession associated with larger quanti-
ties. Furthermore, She can, in the multiple-period version of the model,
return to the market, spreading out her trades over time.
The practice of distributing orders over time to minimize trade impact
is perhaps one of the most common strategies used in practice. With
decimalization and increased fragmentation of trading activity, market
participants have fewer opportunities to easily trade large quantities. In
the present environment, therefore, order-splitting strategies are widely
used by all sorts of traders (uninformed as well as informed). Although
the Kyle model allows for strategic trade, whereas the sequential trade
models do not, it is more stylized in some other respects. There is no bid
and ask, for example; all trades clear at an informationally efﬁcient price.
7.1
The Single-Period Model
The terminal security value is v ∼N(p0, 0). There is one informed trader
who knows v and enters a demand x. Liquidity (“noise”) traders submit
a net order ﬂow u ∼N(0, σ2
u), independent of v. The market maker (MM)
observes the total demand y = x + u and then sets a price, p. All of the
61


62
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
trades are cleared at p. If there is an imbalance between buyers and sellers,
the MM makes up the difference.
Nobody knows the market clearing price when they submit their orders.
Because the liquidity trader order ﬂow is exogenous, there are really only
two players we need to concentrate on: the informed trader and the MM.
The informed trader wants to trade aggressively, for example, buying a
large quantity if her information is positive. But the MM knows that if
he sells into a large net customer buy, he his likely to be on the wrong
side of the trade. He protects himself by setting a price that is increasing
in the net order ﬂow. This acts as a brake on the informed trader’s desires:
If she wishes to buy a lot, she’ll have to pay a high price. The solution to
the model is a formal expression of this trade-off.
We ﬁrst consider the informed trader’s problem (given a conjectured
MM price function) and then show that the conjectured price function
is consistent with the informed trader’s optimal strategy. The informed
trader conjectures that the MM uses a linear price adjustment rule
p = λy + µ where y is the total order ﬂow: y = u + x. λ is an inverse
measure of liquidity. The informed trader’s proﬁts are π = (v −p)x. Sub-
stituting in for the price conjecture and y yields π = x[v −λ(u + x) −µ].
The expected proﬁts are Eπ = x(v −λx −µ). In the sequential trade
models, an informed trader always makes money. This is not true here.
For example, if the informed trader is buying (x > 0), it is possible that a
large surge of uninformed buying (u ≫0) drives the λ(u + x) + µ above v.
The informed trader chooses x to maximize Eπ, yielding x = (v −µ)/2λ.
The second-order condition is λ > 0.
The MM conjectures that the informed trader’s demand is linear in
v: x = α + βv. Knowing the optimization process that the informed trader
followed, the MM can solve for α and β: (v −µ)/2λ = α + βv for all v. This
implies
α = −µ/2λ
and
β = 1/2λ.
(7.1)
The inverse relation between β and λ is particularly important. As liquid-
ity drops (i.e., as λ rises) the informed agent trades less. Now the MM must
ﬁgure out E[v|y]. This computation relies on the following result, which
are also used later in other contexts.
Bivariate normal projection. Suppose that X and Y are bivariate nor-
mal random variables with means µX and µY, variances σ2
X and σ2
Y, and
covariance σXY. The conditional expectation of Y given X is E[Y|X = x] =
µY + (σXY/σ2
X)(x −µX). Because this is linear in X, conditional expecta-
tion is equivalent to projection. The variance of the projection error is
Var[Y|X = x] = σ2
Y −σ2
XY/σ2
X. Note that this does not depend on x.
Here, given the deﬁnition of the order ﬂow variable and the MM’s
conjecture about the informed traders behavior, y = u + α + βv, we
have
Ey = α + βEv = α + βp0, Var(y) = σ2
u + β20,
and
Cov(y, v) = β0.


STRATEGIC TRADE MODELS
63
Using these in the projection results gives
E

v
y

= p0 + β

y −α −βp0

0
σ2u + β20
and
Var

v
y

=
σ2
u0
σ2u + β20
.
(7.2)
This must equal p = λy + µ for all values of y, so
µ = αβ 0 −σ2
up0
σ2u + β20
and
λ =
β 0
σ2u + β20
.
(7.3)
Solving Eqs. (7.1) and (7.3) yields:
α = p0

σ2u
0
;
µ = p0;
λ = 1
2

0
σ2u
;
and
β =

σ2u
0
.
(7.4)
7.1.1
Discussion
Both the liquidity parameter λ and the informed trader’s order coefﬁcient
β depend only on the value uncertainty 0 relative to the intensity of noise
trading σ2
u.
The informed trader’s expected proﬁt is:
Eπ = (v −p0)2
2

σ2u
0.
(7.5)
This is increasing in the divergence between the true value and the uncon-
ditional mean. It is also increasing in the variance of noise trading. We
can think of the noise trading as providing camouﬂage for the informed
trader. This is of practical importance. All else equal, an agent trading
on inside information will be able to make more money in a widely held
and frequently traded stock (at least, prior to apprehension). How much
of the private information is impounded in the price? Using the expres-
sion for β in equation (7.2) gives Var[v|p] = Var[v|y] = 0/2. That is, half
of the insider’s information gets into the price. This does not depend on
the intensity of noise trading.
The essential properties of the Kyle model that make it tractable arise
from the multivariate normality (which gives linear conditional expec-
tations) and a quadratic objective function (which has a linear ﬁrst-order
condition). The multivariate normality can accommodate a range of modi-
ﬁcations. The following exercises explore modiﬁcations to the model that
still ﬁt comfortably within the framework.
Exercise 7.1 (Partially informed noise traders) The noise traders in
the original model are pure noise traders: u is independent of v.


64
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Consider the case where the “uninformed” order ﬂow is positively
related to the value: Cov(u, v) = σuv > 0. We might think of u as
arising from partially informed traders who do not behave
strategically. Proceed as before. Solve the informed trader’s problem;
solve the MM’s problem; solve for the model parameters {α, β, µ, λ}
in terms of the inputs {σ2
u, 0, σuv}. Interpret your results. Show that
when Corr(u, v) = 1, the price becomes perfectly informative.
Exercise 7.2 (Informed trader gets a signal instead of complete
revelation) The informed trader in the basic model has perfect
information about v. Consider the case where she only gets a signal s.
That is, she observes s = v + ε where ε ∼N(0, σ2
ε ), independent of v.
Solve for the model parameters {α, β, µ, λ} in terms of the inputs,
σ2
u, 0, and σ2
ε . Interpret your results. Verify that when σ2
ε = 0,
you get the original model solutions.
Exercise 7.3 Around 1985, a Merrill Lynch broker noticed a
pattern of proﬁtable trades originating from a Bahamas branch of
Bank Leu and began to piggyback his own orders on the Bank Leu
ﬂow. Suppose that when the informed trader in the basic model
puts in an order x, her broker simultaneously puts in an order x,
with γx, with γ > 0. Solve for the model parameters (α, β, µ, λ) in
terms of the inputs, σ2
u, 0, and γ. It turned out that the Bank Leu
orders originated from a New York investment banker, Dennis
Levine, who subsequently pleaded guilty to insider trading (see
Stewart (1992)).
7.2
Multiple Rounds of Trading
A practical issue in market design is the determination of when trad-
ing should occur. Some ﬁrms on the Paris Bourse, for example, trade in
twice-per-day call auctions, others continuously within a trading session.
What happens in the Kyle model as we increase the number of auctions,
ultimately converging to continuous trading?
We will consider the case of N auctions that are equally spaced over
a unit interval of time. The time between auctions is t = 1/N. The auc-
tions are indexed by n = 1, . . . N. The noise order ﬂow arriving at the nth
auction is deﬁned as un. This is distributed normally, un ∼N(0, σ2
ut)
where σ2
u has the units of variance per unit time. The use of the difference
notation facilitates the passage to continuous time. The equilibrium has
the following properties.
• The informed trader’s demand is xn = βn(v −pn−1)tn, where βn
is trading intensity per unit time.
• The price change at the nth auction is pn = pn−1 + λn(xn + un).
• Market efﬁciency requires pn = E[v|yn] where yn is the cumulative
order ﬂow over time.


STRATEGIC TRADE MODELS
65
In equilibrium the informed trader “slices and dices” her order ﬂow,
distributing it over the N auctions. This corresponds to the real-world
practice of splitting orders, which is used by traders of all stripes, not just
informed ones.
Recall that in the sequential trade models, orders are positively auto-
correlated (buys tend to follow buys). Does a similar result hold here? Is
autocorrelation a consequence of the informed trader’s strategic behavior?
There is an argument supporting this conjecture that is intuitive and com-
pelling at ﬁrst glance. The informed trader splits her orders over time,
and so tends to trade on the same side of the market. If her information
is favorable v > p0, she will be buying on average; with negative infor-
mation, she’ll be selling. This establishes a pattern of continuation in her
orders, and as a result Corr(xi, xj) > 0 for any pair of auctions i and j
we might care to examine. Total order ﬂow, being the sum of her demand
and that of the uninformed, is thus the sum of one series that is positively
autocorrelated and one that is uncorrelated. We’d expect the positive auto-
correlation to persist in the total, diluted perhaps by the uncorrelated
noise, but present nonetheless.
In fact, however, total order ﬂow is uncorrelated. Correlation would
imply that order ﬂow is at least partially predictable. Since order ﬂow and
price changes are linearly related (the λn are known at the start of the day),
predictability in the former is equivalent to predictability in the latter.
Autocorrelation in price changes is ruled out by market efﬁciency. More
formally, the conditional expectation of the incremental order ﬂow is:
E[yn|yn−1] = E[un + xn|yn−1] = E[βn(v −pn−1)t|yn−1] = 0.
The ﬁrst equality is deﬁnitional; the second holds because the noise order
ﬂow has zero expectation. The third equality reﬂects the market efﬁciency
condition that E[v|yn−1] = pn−1. From a strategic viewpoint, the informed
trader hides behind the uninformed order ﬂow. This means that she trades
so that the MM can’t predict (on the basis of the net order ﬂow) what she
will do next.
Figure 7.1 depicts the market depth parameter over time as a function
of the number of auctions. In the sequential trade models, manipulation
by an uninformed trader is not generally proﬁtable (section 5.6). A similar
result holds here. Huberman and Stanzl (2004) show that the linear price
schedules of the Kyle model do not allow manipulation and also that only
linear price schedules have this property.
7.3
Extensions and Related Work
The Kyle model lies near the center of a large family of theoretical ana-
lyses. The following list is suggestive of the directions, but far from com-
prehensive. Back (1992) develops continuous time properties. Back and


66
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Figure 7.1.
Market impact and number of auctions.
Baruch (2004) explore the links between the strategic and sequential
trade models. Notably, in their common framework, the informed agent
trades randomly in continuous time. Admati and Pﬂeiderer (1988) incor-
porate strategic uninformed traders (also see Foster and Viswanathan
1990). Subrahmanyam (1991a) considers risk-averse market makers and
informed traders. Spiegel and Subrahmanyam (1992) model the unin-
formed agents as rational risk-averse hedgers. Analyses that feature mul-
tiple securities include Caballe and Krishnan (1994) and Subrahmanyam
(1991b) (also see Admati (1985)). Subrahmanyam considers the case of
a multiple security market that includes a basket security, for example,
a stock index futures contract or an index exchange traded fund. The
diversiﬁcation in an index greatly mitigates ﬁrm-speciﬁc information
asymmetries, making index securities generally cheaper to trade. Holden
and Subrahmanyam (1992, 1994), Foster and Viswanathan (1996), and
Back, Cao, and Willard (2000) consider multiperiod models with multiple
informed traders.


8
A Generalized Roll Model
8.1
Overview
Following the economic analysis, we now turn to empirical examina-
tion of asymmetric information by developing a generalization of the Roll
model. One sensible ﬁrst step is to allow the efﬁcient price to be par-
tially driven by the trade direction indicator variable. A number of models
along these lines have been proposed. The developments in this chapter
are compatible with and can be viewed as special cases of most of these
models. The phrase “generalized Roll model” is not in common use. It
is used here to emphasize the roots of the present developments in the
Roll model.
Although many of these models are estimated jointly over prices and
trades (the qt), the present chapter discusses only univariate speciﬁcations
for price changes, deferring the multivariate models to the next chapter.
One reason for this is that some general features of these models are best
encountered in a univariate setting. In particular, it is easier to see from the
univariate representation of a bivariate model the speciﬁcation problems
that almost certainly plague (but in a more subtle fashion) the multivari-
ate analyses. A second consideration is that although we have good recent
data on U.S. equity markets that allow us to infer qt, this is not univer-
sally the case. In many data samples and markets, only trade prices are
recorded.
8.2
The Structural Model
The efﬁcient price still behaves as a random walk, but the increments have
two components.
67


68
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
mt = mt−1 + wt
(8.1)
wt = λqt + ut.
Here, λqt reﬂects the information content of the time-t trade (λt > 0), and
ut impounds public information, with Corr(qt, ut) = 0. More precisely,
because trades are often reported, ut is better described as reﬂecting non-
trade public information. We follow the earlier convention that the actual
trade price is pt = mt + cqt, that is, the dealer recovers costs of c. In this
context, c is interpreted as noninformational costs.
The trade is at the ask if qt = +1, and at the bid if qt = −1, which imply
that the ask and bid are mt−1 + c + λ + ut and mt−1 −c −λ + ut. Thus, the
bid and ask are set symmetrically about mt−1 + ut. The spread is 2(c + λ),
where c reﬂects the noninformational ﬁxed costs of the trade (clearing
costs, clerical costs, etc.) and λ reﬂects the adverse selection cost. In the
spirit of the asymmetric information models, λ is the price impact nec-
essary to balance expected gains from trading against uninformed agents
with expected losses to informed agents.
These conventions suggest the following timing. Immediately after the
trade at t −1, the efﬁcient price is mt−1. Then public information arrives
as the realization of ut. The dealer sets the bid and ask symmetrically
about mt−1 + ut. Then a trade arrives (a realization of qt), and the efﬁcient
price is updated to mt.
8.3
Statistical Representations
We now turn to reduced-form representations of the model. The model
has three parameters {λ, c, σ2
u}, and two sources of randomness: ut and
qt. Inference is based on the properties of the observed price changes. In
terms of the structural model:
pt = pt −pt−1 = c(qt −qt−1) + λqt + ut.
(8.2)
The price change autocovariances are:
γ0 = E(pt)2 = c2 + (c + λ)2 + σ2
u
(8.3)
γ1 = E(ptpt−1) = −c(c + λ).
All autocovariances of order two or more are zero. This implies (via
the Wold theorem and the Ansley et al. (1977) result) that the price
changes can be represented as the MA(1) process pt = εt + θεt−1.
Section 4.2 discussed determination of the moving average parameters
from the autocovariances.
Neither the two autocovariances {γ0, γ1} nor the two MA parameters
{θ, σ2
ε } sufﬁce to identify the three structural parameters of the model


A GENERALIZED ROLL MODEL
69
{λ, c, σ2
u}. One option is to ﬁx one of the structural parameters. Setting
λ = 0 returns us to the original Roll model (no asymmetric information). If
σ2
u = 0, then we are left with only asymmetric information (no public infor-
mation). Setting c = 0 eliminates noninformational costs. It is sometimes
useful to consider these special cases, but from an economic perspective
they are quite restrictive.
One important parameter of the structural model can be identiﬁed
without further restrictions. From (8.1) the variance of the efﬁcient price
changes is Var(wt) = σ2
w = λ2 + σ2
u. Using (8.3), this same quantity can be
computed as γ0 + 2γ1. It will later be shown that the identiﬁcation of σ2
w
is a general result, extending to multiple lags and multivariate and/or
multiple-price models.
The intuition for this property lies in the behavior of long-term returns.
σ2
w is the variance per unit time of the random-walk component of the
security price. This variance is time-scaled: If we use a longer interval to
compute the change, the variance is simply multiplied by the length of
the interval: Var(mt −mt−k) = kσ2
w. But over long periods, microstructure
effects become relatively less important. Most of the long-term dynamics
in pt are attributable to mt. That is, as k gets large,
σ2
w = Var[mt −mt−k]
k
≈Var[pt −pt−k]
k
,
irrespective of microstructure effects. Identiﬁcation of parameters other
than σ2
w, however, requires more structure or more data.
8.4
Forecasting and Filtering
In the basic Roll model the price forecast (based on a linear projection)
was shown to be
ft ≡lim
k→∞E∗[pt+k|pt, pt−1, . . .] = E∗[pt+1| pt, pt−1, . . .] = pt + θεt.
(8.4)
This is the price forecast for the generalized Roll model as well, because
it has the same MA(1) representation. The earlier discussion emphasized
that although ft has uncorrelated increments (like a martingale), it is not
generally equal to mt from the structural model. Instead, it is what is
usually called a ﬁltered state estimate, the expectation of an unobserved
variable conditional on the history of observations. In the present case,
ft = E∗[mt|pt, pt−1, . . .].
We can demonstrate this by using the structural model to compute ft
and then showing that this is equal to pt + θεt. First, because mt = pt −cq,
ft = pt −cE[qt|pt, pt−1, . . .]. Next, because the price history is equivalent
to the innovation history, ft = pt −cE[qt|εt, εt−1, . . .]. We will consider
projections of the form E∗[qt|εt, εt−1, . . . ] = β0ε1 + β1εt−1 + β2εt−2 + . . .


70
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Because
the
εt
values
are
uncorrelated,
βi = Cov(qt, εt−i)/σ2
ε .
The
Cov(qt, εt−i) can be computed as follows. There are two ways of rep-
resenting pt, the statistical and the structural, and they must agree:
εt + θεt−1 = (c + λ)qt −cqt−1 + ut.
(8.5)
Rearranging this to isolate εt gives εt = (c + λ)qt −cqt−1 + ut −θεt−1.
From this it is clear that Cov(qt, εt) = c + λ and Cov(qt, εt−k) = 0 for k ≥1.
The expectation then reduces to E∗[qt|εt, εt−1, . . . ] = [(c + λ)/σ2
ε ]εt. Using
this,
E∗[mt|pt, pt−1, . . .] = pt −c
c + λ
σ2ε

εt = pt + θεt.
The second equality follows from equating the ﬁrst-order autocovariance
implied by the structural model in (8.3) to that implied by the statistical
model: −c(c + λ) = θσ2
ε .
8.5
The Pricing Error: How Closely Does pt Track mt?
We’ve motivated the c parameter in the model as a cost variable. If cus-
tomers come in and trade against dealer bids and asks, then c is the amount
by which a customer buyer overpays relative to the efﬁcient price (and
similarly for a customer seller). This does not imply that terms of trade or
unfair, or that dealers make proﬁts after their costs, but it does imply a clear
distinction between those who supply liquidity and those who demand it.
Many markets, though, don’t have such a clean dichotomy between
dealers and customers. In limit order markets, bids and asks are set by
other customers. Sometimes we consider the customers who supply liq-
uidity as quasi-dealers, that is, dealers in all but name. More generally,
though, a customer in such a market has a choice between using a mar-
ket or a limit order and (if a limit order) how it is to be priced. In such
markets, the dealer/customer or liquidity supplier/demand roles become
blurry. Even when we can’t directly impute a cost to either side in trade,
though, it is still of interest to know how closely the trade prices track the
efﬁcient price. This is measured by Var(st) ≡σ2
s where st = pt −mt. The
structural model here implies s = cqt, so σ2
s = c2.
Unfortunately, because c is not identiﬁed by the data, σ2
s is not identi-
ﬁed either. However, it does possess a lower bound. To see this, note ﬁrst
that st = pt −mt = (pt −ft) −(mt −ft). Because ft is a linear projection of
mt on {pt, pt−1, . . .}, the ﬁltering error mt −ft is uncorrelated with pt −ft.
Therefore
σ2
s = Var(pt −ft) + Var(mt −ft).
(8.6)
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side does not depend on the structural
identiﬁcation and is easily computed as Var(pt −ft) = Var(−θεt) = θ2σ2
ε .


A GENERALIZED ROLL MODEL
71
Now we turn to the second term, essentially seeking the structural
identiﬁcation for which it is minimized.
Consider the reduced-form and structural models under the restric-
tion σ2
u = 0, or equivalently that ut = 0 for all t. In this case, the only
randomness in the structural model arises from qt, and equation (8.5)
establishes an exact correspondence between the two representations and
their disturbances. That is, if εt + θεt = (c + λ)qt −cqt−1, then we can set
εt = (c + λ)qt for all t and θ = −c/(c + λ). The ﬁltered estimate of mt then
becomes ft = pt + θεt = pt −cqt = mt. So under the restriction σ2
u = 0, the
ﬁltered estimate is exact, and Var(mt −ft) = 0. As a variance cannot be neg-
ative, this establishes that under any structural identiﬁcation, σ2
s cannot
fall below σ2
s = θ2σ2
ε . In terms of the structural parameters, this is
σ2
s = 1
2

c2 + (c + λ)2 + σ2
u −

λ2 + σ2u
 
(2c + λ)2 + σ2u

.
(8.7)
It is easy to exceed this lower bound, that is, to ﬁnd a set of struc-
tural parameters for which σ2
s = σ2
s. For the generalized Roll model, the
lower bound is attained when all information is trade-related. In the orig-
inal model, all information is public, and σ2
s = −γ1 = −θσ2
ε > σ2
s = θ2σ2
ε ,
because −1 < θ < 0.
There does not exist an upper bound for σ2
s. The problem is that there
are many alternative structural models that are observationally equivalent
(have the same θ and σ2
ε ). For example, consider pt = mt−2 + cqt. Here,
trade price is driven by an efﬁcient price that is two periods “stale.” Then
st = pt−mt = −wt −wt−1 + cqt. Relative to the original model, σ2
s is inﬂated
by 2σ2
w. One can make economic arguments that it is unlikely that the
price is extremely lagged relative to beliefs. Were quotes set relative to
yesterday’s efﬁcient price, customers would be unwilling to trade on one
side of the market. Arguments like this might justify at least a provisional
assumption about how stale the price is likely to be, but they must be based
on economics rather than statistics. Statistical analysis does not provide
an upper bound.
Finally, σ2
w is the random-walk variance per unit time. For example, if
the model is estimated over one-minute intervals, then σ2
w is variance per
minute. It may be rescaled, of course, to give an implied hourly or daily
random-walk variance (see exercise 8.3). The pricing error variance σ2
s, on
the other hand, is the variance of a difference between two level variables
at a point in time. It does not have a time dimension.
8.6
General Univariate Random-Walk
Decompositions
Up to now, the chapter has explored the correspondence between a
known structural model and its statistical representations. This was


72
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
useful for illuminating what we could (and could not) learn about the
former from the latter. Here we ask what can be inferred starting from a
moving average representation of price changes that is not of order one
but is instead of arbitrary order: pt = θ(L)εt. The only economic structure
we impose on the prices is pt = mt + st where mt follows a random walk
(mt = mt−1 + wt) and st is (as in the preceding section) a tracking error that
may be serially correlated and partially or completely correlated with wt.
The observable variable, pt, is thus decomposed into a random-walk
and a covariance-stationary error. Random-walk decompositions were
originally developed and applied in macroeconomic settings, where the
random-walk component is considered the long-term trend and the
stationary component impounds transient business cycle effects. This
literature mostly employs the trend/cycle terminology. The treatment
here follows the historical development of this literature. I begin with
Beveridge and Nelson (1981) and follow with the more general case
described in Watson (1986). Later chapters explore multivariate exten-
sions and cointegration.
In macroeconomics applications, random-walk decompositions are
usually called permanent/transitory. The random-walk terminology is
used here to stress the ﬁnancial economics connection to the random-walk
efﬁcient prices. The permanent/transitory distinction is in some respects
more descriptive, however, of the attributions that we’re actually making.
From a microstructure perspective, the key results expand on those
demonstrated for the generalized Roll model: The moving average rep-
resentation for the price changes sufﬁces to identify the variance of the
implicit efﬁcient price σ2
w, the projection of the efﬁcient price on past price
changes, and a lower bound on the variance of the difference between the
transaction price and the efﬁcient price. The development in this section
is heuristic and intuitive. The appendix gives a more formal development.
The starting point is the price forecast ft:
ft ≡lim
k→∞E∗[pt+k| pt, pt−1, . . .]
= pt + E∗[pt+1|εt, εt−1, . . .] + E∗[pt+2|εt, εt−1, . . .] + · · ·
= pt +
∞

k=0
θk+1εt−k +
∞

k=0
θk+2εt−k +
∞

k=0
θk+3εt−k + · · ·
(8.8)
= pt +


∞

j=0
θj+1

εt +


∞

j=0
θj+2

εt−1 +


∞

j=0
θj+3

εt−2 + · · ·
With this construction, the ﬁrst-difference of ft is
ft = pt +


∞

j=0
θj+1

εt −θ1εt−1 −θ2εt−2 −· · ·


A GENERALIZED ROLL MODEL
73
=
∞

j=0
θjεt−j +


∞

j=0
θj+1

εt −θ1εt−1 −θ2εt−2 −· · ·
(8.9)
=


∞

j=0
θj

εt = θ(1)εt.
So the increments to ft, being a constant multiple of an uncorrelated series,
are themselves uncorrelated. Although this is not a sufﬁcient condition
for ft to be a martingale, it is a necessary one. Is it reasonable, then, to
simply assert that ft is the efﬁcient price?
If ft = mt then writing mt = mt−1 + wt establishes a correspondence:
wt = θ(1)εt. Its variance is
σ2
w = θ(1)2σ2
ε .
(8.10)
This particular result is invariant to identiﬁcation. The discrepancy
between efﬁcient and transaction prices is st = pt −mt. Using equation
(8.8),
st = C0εt + C1εt−1 + C2εt−2 + · · ·
where Ci = −
∞

j=i+1
θj.
(8.11)
From this,
σ2
s =
∞

i=0
C2
i σ2
ε .
(8.12)
Equivalently, we may express st in terms of the wt: st = A0wt + A1wt−1 +
A2wt−2 + · · · , where Ak = −θ(1)−1 ∞
j=k+1 θj.
This has all followed from assuming that ft = mt, in which case st is a
function of current and past wt. But suppose that st, while still zero-mean
and covariance stationary, is uncorrelated with wt:
st = ηt + B1ηt−1 + B2ηt−2 + · · · ,
where {ηt} is a white-noise process uncorrelated with {wt}. This is more
complicated than the previous case. If the moving averages are ﬁnite, it is
still possible to solve for the Bs and σ2
η in terms of the θs and σ2
ε , but the
computation involves solving a polynomial equation. Rather than pursue
this case further, though, we will move right on to the general case where
st contains terms in wt and terms uncorrelated with wt:
st = (A0wt + A1wt−1 + · · ·) + (ηt + B1ηt−1 + · · ·).
(8.13)
This model is now unidentiﬁed, but as with the generalized Roll model,
we have two substantive results. First, the variance of the efﬁcient price
increments, σ2
w, is the same for all feasible sets of parameters. We have
already determined this for one particular set, the case where st involves


74
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
only terms in wt. Second, σ2
s computed under this restriction is a lower
bound. The chapter appendix develops these results in greater depth.
Hasbrouck (1993) establishes the lower bound result in a microstruc-
ture setting. Independently, Eckbo and Liu (1993) arrive at the result in a
macroeconomic context.
This discussion has proceeded from the starting point of a MA model
for price changes pt = θ(L)εt. Starting from an autoregressive repre-
sentation, φ(L)pt = εt, we can invert to obtain the moving aver-
age (by computing φ(L) = θ(L)−1). This is not, however, necessary if
we’re simply interested in σ2
w. Because φ(1) = θ(1)−1, σ2
w = φ(1)−2σ2
ε (see
exercise 8.2). Similarly, with a mixed ARMA like φ(L)pt = θ(L)εt,
σ2
w = φ(1)−2θ(1)2σ2
ε .
Exercise 8.1 (The Roll model with stale prices) The beliefs of market
participants at time t are summarized in mt, where mt = mt−1 + wt.
But due to operational delays, trades actually occur relative to a
lagged value: pt = mt−1 + cqt. What are the autocovariances of pt?
What is its moving average representation?
Exercise 8.2 (Lagged price adjustment, without a bid-ask spread)
Delays may also lead to price adjustments that do not instantaneously
correct. Suppose mt = mt−1 + wt, but pt = pt−1 + α(mt −pt−1), with
0 < α < 1. Show that the autoregressive representation for price
changes is φ(L)pt = εt where φ(L) = (1 −(1 −α)L) and εt = αwt.
Verify that φ(1)−2σ2
ε = σ2
w.
Exercise 8.3 For log price changes over ﬁve-minute
intervals, we estimate a second-order moving average model:
pt = εt −0.3εt−1 + 0.1εt−2, where σ2
ε = 0.00001.
a. What is the random-walk standard deviation per ﬁve-minute
interval?
b. Assuming a six-hour trading day, what is the implied random-
walk standard deviation over the day?
c. Compute the lower bound for the standard deviation of the pricing
error.
8.7
Other Approaches
There is a long tradition in empirical ﬁnance of measuring market
efﬁciency (informational and operational) by measuring or assessing
how closely security prices follow a random walk. Statistical measures
commonly focus on autocovariances, autocorrelations, or variance ratios.
The autocovariances and autocorrelations of a random-walk are zero
at all nonzero leads and lags. This makes for a clean null hypothesis, and
there exists a large number of tests to evaluate this null. But if a random
walk is rejected (and in microstructure data, it usually is), how should


A GENERALIZED ROLL MODEL
75
we proceed? Statistical signiﬁcance (rejecting the null) does not imply
economic signiﬁcance. It is difﬁcult to reduce a set of autocovariances
and autocorrelations to a single meaningful number.
One approach is to compare the variances of returns computed at dif-
ferent intervals or endpoints. It was noted before that transaction price
returns computed over long horizons are dominated by the random-walk
component. A variance ratio compares the variance per unit time implied
by a long horizon with a variance per unit time computed from a short
horizon:
VM,N = Var(pt −pt−M)/M
Var(pt −pt−N)/N ,
(8.14)
where M, N > 0. If pt follows a random walk, VM,N = 1 for all M and N.
Usually, though if microstructure effects dominate short-horizon returns,
then typically, with M < N, VM,N > 1. That is, microstructure effects
inﬂate the variance per unit time in the short run. If we set N large, V M,N
generally declines as M approaches N from below. In a sense, then, this
can summarize how quickly (in terms of return interval) the prices come
to resemble a random walk.
As a single summary statistic, though, V M,N is problematic. There are
few principles to apply in choosing M and N. Furthermore, negative auto-
correlation at some lags can be offset by positive correlation at others,
resulting in Vs near unity, even though the process exhibits complicated
dependent behavior.
Variance ratios are also computed when the horizons are the same,
but endpoints differ. In some markets, for example, the ﬁrst and last
trades of the day occur using different mechanisms, Typically, the opening
price (ﬁrst trade) is determined using a single-price call, and the closing
price is that last trade in a continuous session. The relative efﬁciencies
of the two mechanisms are sometimes assessed by variance ratios like
Var(pOpen
t
−pOpen
t−1 )/Var(pClose
t
−pClose
t−1 ). Studies along these lines include
Amihud and Mendelson (1987, 1991), Amihud, Mendelson, and Murgia
(1990), and Ronen (1998).
Appendix: Identiﬁcation in Random-Walk
Decompositions
This discussion provides more detail on the results described in
section 8.6. Let pt = mt + st where mt = mt−1 + wt and st = A(L)wt + B(L)ηt,
where wt and ηt are uncorrelated. Using the lag operator, the price
changes are:
pt = (1 −L)pt = (1 −L)mt + (1 −L)st
= [1 + (1 −L)A(L)]wt + (1 −L)B(L)ηt.
(8.15)
The corresponding MA model is pt = θ(L)εt.


76
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Subsequent developments rely on a device called the autocovariance
generating function (AGF). For a covariance-stationary univariate time
series {xt} with autocovariances γk = Cov(xt, xt−k) for k = · · · −2, −1, 0, 1,
2, . . . the AGF is:
γx(z) = · · · + γ−2z−2 + γ−1z−1 + γ0 + γ1z + γ2z2 + · · ·
(8.16)
For a univariate time series there is a symmetry γk = γ−k. Furthermore, if
{xt} and {yt} are mutually uncorrelated at all leads and lags, the autoco-
variance function of the series {xt + yt} is given by gx+y(z) = gx(z) + gy(z).
Although the AGF may initially seem like nothing more than a way to tab-
ulate autocovariances, it can also be used to compute the autocovariances.
Speciﬁcally, if {xt} possesses a moving average representation xt = θ(L)εt,
then gx(z) = θ(z−1)θ(z)σ2
ε . Hamilton (1994, section 3.6) discusses the AGF
in greater depth.
Returning to the problem at hand, from the moving average repre-
sentation for price changes, gp(z) = θ(z−1)θ(z)σ2
ε . From the structural
representation
gp(z) =

1 −(1 −z−1)A(z−1)

[1 −(1 −z)A(z)] σ2
w
+

(1 −z−1)B(z−1)

[(1 −z)B(z)] σ2
η.
(8.17)
Equating these two expressions and evaluating both sides at z = 1 gives
σ2
w = [θ(1)]2σ2
ε , where θ(1) = 1 + θ1 + θ2 + · · · If price changes are originally
expressed in autoregressive form, we don’t need to compute the full mov-
ing average. From φ(L)pt = εt, we can go right to σ2
w = [φ(1)]2σ2
ε , where
φ(1) is the sum of the autoregressive coefﬁcients.
If the pricing error is driven entirely by the information innovation
wt, st = A(L)wt. Equating the structural and statistical representations for
pt gives
θ(L)εt = [1 −(1 −L)A(L)]wt.
(8.18)
Both εt and wt are white-noise processes. The correspondence suggests
that wt = θ(1)εt. Using this and solving for A(L) gives A(L) = (1 −L)−1[θ(L) −
θ(1)]θ(1)−1. Expanding (1 −L)−1 about L = 0 and multiplying through
gives:
A(L) = θ(1)−1(−θ1 −θ2 −θ3 −· · · ) + θ(1)−1(−θ2 −θ3 −· · · )L
+ θ(1)−1(−θ2 −θ3 −· · · )L2 + · · ·
(8.19)
The implied A(L) coefﬁcients are identical to those given in equation (8.11)
and the related discussion.


A GENERALIZED ROLL MODEL
77
If the pricing error is uncorrelated with wt at all leads and lags,
st = B(L)ηt. The equivalence of the autocovariance generating functions
in this case implies θ(z−1)θ(z)σ2
ε = σ2
w + (1 −z−1)B(z−1)(1 −z)B(z). If the
order of θ(L) is n and the coefﬁcients (or estimates) are known, then the
B coefﬁcients may be determined by solving the nth-order polynomial
equation.


9
Multivariate Linear Microstructure
Models
Although the trade price is usually the single most important variable in
a microstructure analysis, other variables can help explain its dynamics.
These include orders, trades, prices of the same security in other markets,
prices of related securities, and so on. Inclusion of these variables can
enhance the forecasting power of a model. Under certain assumptions,
the multivariate models support an attribution of this forecasting power,
essentially identifying price changes with particular sources of informa-
tion. This chapter discusses models where there is one price and one or
more supplementary variables. The principal qualiﬁcation on these vari-
ables is that they should not be cointegrated with (“very closely related
to”) the price under consideration. Models with cointegrated prices are
discussed in the following chapter. For the present material, Hamilton
(1994, Ch. 10 and 11) discusses general modeling aspects; Hasbrouck
(1988, 1991a, 1991b and 1993) describes microstructure applications.
We are interested in analyzing the dynamics of an n × 1 vector-valued
time series yt = [pt
x′
t]′ where the ﬁrst element is the price change,
xt is an (n −1) × 1 vector of additional variables, and [ ]′ denotes matrix
transposition. Placing the price change ﬁrst is simply an expositional sim-
pliﬁcation and carries no implications that this variable is ﬁrst in any
causal sense. The chapter treats the general case but uses a particular
structural model for purposes of illustration. The structural model is a
bivariate model of price changes and trade directions: yt = [pt
qt]′.
9.1
Modeling Vector Time Series
The basic descriptive statistics of a vector stochastic process {yt} are
the process mean µ = E[yt] and the vector autocovariances. The vector
autocovariances are deﬁned as the matrices
78


MULTIVARIATE LINEAR MICROSTRUCTURE MODELS
79
Ŵk = E( yt −E[yt])(yt−k −E[yt])′
for k = . . . −2, −1, 0, +1, +2, . . .
(9.1)
In suppressing the dependence of µ and Ŵk on t, we have implicitly
invoked an assumption of covariance stationarity. Note that although a
univariate autocorrelation has the property that γk = γ−k, the correspond-
ing property in the multivariate case is Ŵk = Ŵ′
−k.
If µ = 0, or equivalently if the yt have been de-meaned, then by a multi-
variate version of the Wold theorem, there exists a vector moving average
(VMA) representation of the process:
yt = εt + θ1εt−1 + θ2εt−2 + · · · = (I + θ1L + θ2L2 + · · ·) εt = θ(L)εt,
(9.2)
where εt is a vector white-noise process with Eεt = 0, Var(εt) = Eεtε′
t = ,
and Eεtε′
t−k = 0 for k̸ = 0. The θi are the n × n coefﬁcient matrices, and θ(L)
is a matrix lag polynomial.
As in the univariate case, for purposes of forecasting and estimation it
is often useful to express a multivariate process in terms of its own lagged
values. The vector autoregression (VAR) corresponding to (9.2) is:
yt = φ1yt−1 + φ2yt−2 + · · · + εt,
(9.3)
where the φi are the n × n coefﬁcient matrices. This representation exists if
the VMA is invertible. In principle, invertibility can be veriﬁed by examin-
ing the roots of the VMA determinantal equation (Fuller (1996), theorem
2.8.2, p. 78). In practice, the VMA representation is constructed from the
VAR, that is, we’re usually going in the other direction. Nevertheless, we
will see in later chapters structural models that are clearly noninvertible.
To compute the VAR representation from the VMA, we note that from
equation (9.2), θ(L)−1yt = εt, and from (9.3), (I −φ1L −φ2L2 −· · ·) yt = εt.
So we can determine the φi by taking a series expansion of θ(L)−1.
We now describe a particular structural model.
9.2
A Structural Model of Prices and Trades
The univariate models discussed earlier focused on price changes. The
model described here also includes order dynamics. In the earlier models,
the trade directions (the qt) are generally assumed to be serially uncorre-
lated. In reality trades in most markets are positively autocorrelated, for
example, buys tend to follow buys. One way of modeling this is to allow
qt to follow the MA(1) process:
qt = vt + βvt−1,
(9.4)
where β > 0 and vt is a white-noise process. Note that because qt = ±1, the
vt will be serially uncorrelated, but not independent (see section 4.6).


80
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
In the generalized Roll model, qt appears in two roles. First, it simply
determines whether the trade occurs at the bid or ask. Second, it drives
the revision in the efﬁcient price due to inferred private information.
Although the point was not emphasized in the discussion of the origi-
nal model, qt was unforecastable: E[qt|qt−1, qt−2, . . . ] = 0. This is not true
in the present case. Here, the update to traders’ beliefs accompanying the
realization of qt is the innovation qt −E[qt|qt−1, qt−2, . . . ] = vt. The incre-
ment to the efﬁcient price is therefore driven by the order innovation:
mt = mt−1 + wt
where
wt = ut + λvt.
(9.5)
Using pt = mt + cqt and equation (9.4), the price changes may be written:
pt = ut + λvt + c[(vt + βvt−1) −(vt−1 + βvt−2)].
(9.6)
By stacking equations (9.4) and (9.6) to form a matrix equation:

pt
qt

=

1
c + λ
0
1
 
ut
vt

+

0
c(β −1)
0
β

×

ut−1
vt−1

+

0
−cβ
0
0
 
ut−2
vt−2

.
(9.7)
Equation (9.7) is a VMA, but it is not in a form like equation (9.2)
where the coefﬁcient of the current disturbance is the identity matrix. To
accomplish this normalization, deﬁne
εt = B

ut
vt

where
B =

1
c + λ
0
1

Then using [ut
vt]′ = B−1εt, the model may be put in the form of
equation (9.2) with
θ1 =

0
−c −βλ
0
β

;
θ2 =

0
−cβ
0
0

;
θk = 0
for k > 2.
(9.8)
Finally,
 ≡Var(εt) =

σ2
u + (c + λ)2 σ2
v
(c + λ) σ2
v
(c + λ) σ2
v
σ2
v

.
(9.9)
The VAR representation (equation (9.3)) may be computed by series
expansion of θ(L)−1. It is of inﬁnite order. The leading coefﬁcients are:
φ1 =

0
−c(1 −β)
0
β

;
φ2 =

0
−cβ2
0
−β2

;
(9.10)
φ3 =

0
cβ3
0
β3

;
φ4 =

0
−cβ4
0
−β4

; · · ·


MULTIVARIATE LINEAR MICROSTRUCTURE MODELS
81
Because |β| < 1, the coefﬁcients are decreasing in magnitude.
If β = 0, the structural model is identical to the generalized Roll model
discussed in chapter 8. Even in this case, though, the multivariate statisti-
cal models discussed in the present section will differ from the univariate
models considered earlier.
The structural model does not exhibit the full range of dynamic inter-
actions that VAR models can accommodate. Causality in this model is
one-way: from trades to prices. Other mechanisms, however, might trans-
mit effects in the opposite direction. A strong price movement due to
public information, for example, might draw in momentum traders buying
on what they perceive to be an emerging price trend.
9.3
Forecasts and Impulse Response Functions
As in the univariate case, the forecasts implied by the model are interesting
as descriptive tools but also as estimates of market participants’ beliefs.
Forecasts are usually computed from autoregressive representations, but
to stress the latter interpretation, we will work initially from the moving
average form. From equation (9.2),
E∗[yt+k|yt, yt−1, . . .] = E∗[yt+k|εt, εt−1, . . .]
= θkεt + θk−1εt−1 + θk−2εt−2 + · · ·
for k ≥0
(9.11)
The ﬁrst equality reﬂects our ability to recover the disturbances recur-
sively from the VAR form of the model (using equation (9.3)). The second
equality is a consequence of the fact that E[εt+k|εt, εt−1, . . . ] = 0 for k ≥1.
The price forecast is of particular interest:
ft ≡lim
k→∞E∗[pt+k|pt, pt−1]
= pt +
∞

k=1
E∗
pt+k|pt, pt−1

= pt +


∞

j=0
[θj+1]1

εt +


∞

j=0
[θj+2]1

εt−1 +


∞

j=0
[θj+3]1

εt−2 + · · ·
(9.12)
where [θj+1]1 denotes the ﬁrst row of matrix θj+1. As in the univariate case,
it can be veriﬁed that
ft =


∞

j=0
[θj]1

εt.


82
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Thus, ft has uncorrelated increments. In general, ft = E∗[mt|yt, yt−1, . . . ],
the projection of mt on the history of the model variables, but except in
special cases ft̸ = mt.
This forecast procedure involves stepping the model ahead beyond its
current (actual, observable) state. We may also be interested in forecast-
ing subsequent to a hypothetical innovation, for example, a typical trade
(or a trade that we may be contemplating). The timing convention here
is that we are forecasting conditional on yt−1, yt−2, . . . (or, equivalently,
εt−1, εt−2), and an εt that we specify.
This sort of forecast can also be used as a descriptive tool for illustrat-
ing the behavior of an estimated model. The dynamic structure usually
emerges most clearly when we examine an innovation at time zero and
also set to zero all prior innovations. The resulting forecast is called the
impulse response function:
ψs(ε0) ≡E∗[ys|ε0, ε−1 = ε−2 = · · · = 0]
for s ≥0.
(9.13)
ψs(ε0) summarizes the effect of an innovation ε0 after s periods have
elapsed.
From the VMA representation (equation (9.2)), we have ψs(ε0) = θsε0.
(In fact, the impulse response calculation is often used to obtain the VMA
coefﬁcients.) For some variables (notably price changes), the cumulative
impulse response function may be more useful:
s(ε0) ≡
s

k=0
ψs(ε0).
(9.14)
Whether computing the impulse response function as a descriptive
tool or forecasting the effects of a contemplated action, we need to give
some thought to the speciﬁcation of ε0. As a realistic example, we might
wish to examine a buy order (qt = +1), either to illustrate how the market
responds to a typical buy order or to forecast what will happen (at least
in the short run) if we actually place such an order.
If we know that the structural model is the particular one described in
section 9.2, we simply set vt so that qt = +1, set ut = 0 and forecast using
equation (9.7). We do not usually know the structural model, however.
Typically we’re working from estimates of a statistical model (a VAR or
VMA). This complicates speciﬁcation of ε0. From the perspective of the
VAR or VMA model of the trade and price data, the innovation vector and
its variance are:
εt =

εp,t
εq,t

and
 =

σ2
p
σp,q
σp,q
σ2
q

.
(9.15)
The innovations in the statistical model are simply associated with
the observed variables, and have no necessary structural interpretation.
We can still set εq,t according to our contemplated trade (εq,t = +1), but
how should we set εp,t?


MULTIVARIATE LINEAR MICROSTRUCTURE MODELS
83
The answer to this speciﬁc problem depends on the immediate (time t)
relation between the trade and price-change innovations. The broader
issue in time-series analysis concerns contemporaneous effects among
the model variables. It turns out that although there is no single reliable
answer, the structure of the covariance matrix  tells us something about
the range of possibilities. The next section shows how to determine this.
9.4
Resolution of Contemporaneous Effects
The uncertainty surrounding contemporaneous effects in VAR/VMA
speciﬁcations can be resolved by imposing a causal ordering, essen-
tially a restriction that the innovation in one variable may affect that
of another but not the reverse. Alternative orderings generally lead to
different forecasts and impulse response functions, so consideration of
these alternatives suggests bounds on these functions.
The main tool for imposing a causal ordering is the Cholesky factoriza-
tion (also called the Cholesky decomposition). For a nonsingular covari-
ance matrix (more generally, a symmetric positive deﬁnite matrix) ,
the Cholesky factorization is given by  = F′F where F is an upper
triangular matrix (i.e., has zeros below the main diagonal.)
Suppose that  is the covariance matrix of a vector random variable ε.
We can view ε as being constructed as ε = F′z where Var(z) = I. Because F
is upper triangular, F′ is lower triangular:


ε1
ε2
...
εn


=


f11
0
· · ·
0
f21
f22
· · ·
0
...
...
...
0
fn,1
fn,2
· · ·
fn,n




z1
z2
...
zn


.
(9.16)
In this representation, it is natural to think of z1 as the ε1 factor. In turn, ε2
is driven by z1 and by a second residual ε2 factor, and so on. Essentially,
we are taking ε1 as the ﬁrst driver, projecting ε2 on ε1, projecting ε3 on ε1
and ε2, and so on.
The Cholesky factorization of a covariance matrix for two zero-mean
random variables x1 and x2 is given by:

σ2
1
σ12
σ12
σ2
2

= F′F
where F′ =

σ1
0
σ12 /σ1

σ2
2 −σ2
12
"
σ2
1

.
(9.17)
The intuition is that x1 can be “generated” as the product of σ1 and z1 (a
random variable with unit variance), and x2 as the product of z1 and a


84
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
projection coefﬁcient (σ12/σ1), plus a multiple of z2 (a second factor that
is uncorrelated with z1). Thus, x1 is placed ﬁrst in the causal ordering.
The causal ordering imposed by the decomposition is the same order
in which the variables appear in the covariance matrix. Although we often
arrange variables so that the most interesting ones are ﬁrst or nearly so,
there are no statistical reasons for preferring one ordering over another.
Ordering effects may be illustrated using the sample structural model.
We start from the statistical representation of the model and see how
close we can come to recovering the true structure. Using (9.17) to com-
pute the Cholesky decomposition for the  given in equation (9.9), letting
σ2
1 = σ2
p = σ2
u + (c + λ)2σ2
v, and so on, do we recover the structure of εt in
(9.9)? We do not. As the model is speciﬁed, pt is the ﬁrst variable and
qt the last. With this ordering, the Cholesky decomposition will imply a
structure in which the price change drives the contemporaneous trade.
This is the reverse of how the structural model actually works.
To investigate the alternative ordering (“qt ﬁrst”), we could go back to
the beginning and specify all equations in terms of a reordered variable
set (with yt = [qt
pt]′), but it is easier to permute Var(εt), compute the
Cholesky factorization, and then reverse the permutation to restore the
original order. The permuted innovation term is:
ε∗
t =

εq,t
εp,t

=

vt
ut + (c + λ)vt

.
(9.18)
The corresponding variance and Cholesky decomposition are:
∗=

σ2
v
(c + λ)σ2
v
(c + λ)σ2
v
σ2
u + (c + λ)2σ2
v

= F∗′F∗
where F∗=

σv
(c + λ)σv
0
σu

.
(9.19)
Rearranging to restore the starting order, the original Var(εt) can be
expressed as:
 = F′F
where F =

σu
(c + λ)σv
0
σv

.
(9.20)
For example, a factor interpretation εt = F′zt with a “one-unit” shock to
the trade factor then gives:
εt = F′

0
1

=

(c + λ)σv
σv

.
(9.21)
This implies that a one-σv shock to qt causes an immediate shock of
(c + λ)σv to pt. Thus, imposing this ordering in the statistical model
identiﬁes the correct ordering in the structural model.


MULTIVARIATE LINEAR MICROSTRUCTURE MODELS
85
9.5
Random-Walk Decompositions
in Multivariate Models
We consider the general case where yt = [pt
x′
t]′ possesses a VMA
representation yt = θ(L)εt where Cov(εt) = . The random-walk decom-
position is still expressed as pt = mt + st, where mt = mt + wt, and st is
a zero-mean covariance stationary process. st may be partially driven by
current and lagged wt, and may also have components uncorrelated with
these disturbances.
9.5.1
The Random-Walk Variance
The variance of the random-walk innovation is
σ2
w = [θ(1)]1[θ(1)]′
1,
(9.22)
where [θ(1)]1 denotes the ﬁrst row of θ(1), that is, the row corresponding
to pt. If  is diagonal, the right-hand side of equation (9.22) consists of
n distinct terms, each of which represents the corresponding variable’s
contribution to σ2
w.
If  is nondiagonal, these contributions can be described using
Cholesky factorizations. Letting d = [θ(1)]1F′, where F is the upper tri-
angular Cholesky factor, σ2
w =  d2
i . The vector d can be computed from
the VMA representation of the model, and its squares represent the indi-
vidual variance contributions. The magnitudes of the di are, of course,
dependent on the ordering used to construct the Cholesky factorization.
For the illustration model, the VMA coefﬁcients are given in equation (9.8)
and the Cholesky factorization (permuted, with trades “ﬁrst”) is given by
equation (9.20). This implies
σ2
w =
#
1
−c
$ 
σu
(c + λ)σv
0
σv
 
σu
0
(c + λ)σv
σv
 
1
c

(9.23)
=
#
σu
λσv
$ 
σu
λσv

= σ2
u + λ2σ2
v.
This recovers the public information and trade-related (“private informa-
tion”) components.
From the perspective of the sequential and strategic trade models, the
effects of trades on prices arise from asymmetric information. The fore-
going decomposition therefore suggests proxies for the latter. λ2σ2
v is an
absolute measure. If the prices are measured in logs, λσv is approximately
the standard deviation of the trade-drive return component. The quantity


86
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
λ2σ2
v/σ2
w is a relative measure, essentially the coefﬁcient of determination
in a project of price changes on trades.
More generally, decomposition of the random-walk variance provides
a basis for measuring the importance of different sources of market infor-
mation. The xt variable set can potentially include order characteristics,
coarse identiﬁcation information about order submitters, and (subject
to the qualiﬁcations of the following chapter) prices of other securities
(e.g., of a stock index futures contract). The decompositions can often
support reﬁned attributions of where value-relevant information ﬁrst
arises.
9.5.2
The Pricing Error
If we provisionally assume that ft = mt, then the pricing error is st = pt −ft.
Using the moving average representations for pt and ft, we can show
that equation (8.11) holds in the multivariate setting when each scalar
θi in (8.11) is replaced by [θi]1, the ﬁrst row of the matrix θi. The pricing
error variance is
σ2
s =
∞

k=0
CkC′
k
where
Ck = −
∞

j=k+1

θj

1.
(9.24)
This expression gives the variance exactly only in the case where ft = mt.
More generally it establishes a lower bound.
In the structural model, st = cqt = c(vt + βvt−1), which implies σ2
s = c2
(1 + β)2σ2
v. Applying equation (9.24), using (9.8) and (9.9),
σ2
s = [θ1 + θ2]1  [θ1 + θ2]′
1 + [θ2]1  [θ2]′
1
(9.25)
= c2 
1 + β2
σ2
v.
Thus, for this particular structural model, the lower bound is exact.
Recall that if β = 0, trades are uncorrelated, and the structural model
is equivalent to the generalized Roll model. For that model, the lower
bound was exact only in the special case where all information was trade
related. The present result is therefore stronger. Including trades in the
model gives us additional explanatory power.
9.6
Informational Attributions
We now turn to the general case of yt = [pt
x′
t]′ , where xt is a set of sup-
plementary explanatory variables. The ﬁrst point is that holding constant


MULTIVARIATE LINEAR MICROSTRUCTURE MODELS
87
the time span of the sample, σ2
w is in principle invariant to the choice of
xt. The same value should be obtained if xt is a large and comprehensive
set of market data, or if yt = pt (a univariate analysis). In ﬁnite samples,
of course, the computed values of σ2
w will differ numerically, but these
differences should not generally be attributed to economic features of the
problem. It should not be asserted, for example, that a particular set of
conditioning information implies a more or less volatile efﬁcient price.
This is a consequence of the covariance stationary framework assumed
for the analysis. If Var(pt) is unconditionally constant over time, then
the long-run price change variance (Var( n
i=1 pt+i), for large n) will also
be constant (see section 8.3).
In contrast, the ﬁltered price estimate ft does depend on xt. Among
other things, the precision of the ﬁlter is likely to be enhanced by richer
conditioning information. As an illustration, consider the bivariate struc-
tural model under the restriction that β = 0 (in which case the structural
model is identical to the generalized Roll model). When yt = [pt
qt],
ft = mt, that is, the projection is exact. When we don’t condition on trades
(yt = pt), however, ft̸ = mt generally.
The information attributions implied by decompositions of σ2
w depend
on the choice of xt. A speciﬁcation of xt that is signiﬁcantly coarser
than the true public information set may generate misleading impli-
cations. The price changes of individual stocks, for example, exhibit
common factors. This suggests that analysis of pt for an individual
stock should include in the xt a variable such as the price change in a
stock index. A coarse variable, for example, the return on the cash index
over the previous day, is likely to contribute little in a decomposition
of σ2
w. A more current (yet still widely disseminated) series, for exam-
ple, recent 10-second returns on the corresponding stock index futures
contract, will almost certainly imply (and correctly so) a larger informa-
tional attribution. The estimated total informational contribution of the
remaining variables will drop, but some individual contributions might
in fact rise (depending on their correlations with each other and the futures
returns).
What if xt represents an information set that is in some respects
ﬁner than the true public information collection? Although it would
be unusual to include variables that are known to no market par-
ticipants, analyses sometimes include data available to only a few.
Hasbrouck (1996b) estimates speciﬁcations that differentiate New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE) program orders. Program orders involve multi-
ple stocks, and would therefore presumably convey different information
than an order for a single stock. Although the NYSE specialist could
identify program orders, traders off the ﬂoor generally could not. Kurov
and Lasser (2004) examine the impact of futures trades classiﬁed by
whether or not they involve a futures exchange “local” (ﬂoor trader).


88
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
A trader’s identity would be known on the exchange ﬂoor, but not
away from it. Sometimes even basic data fall in this category. Some
analyses of foreign exchange dynamics include prices and quantities
of recent trades. Yet there is no general trade reporting in this mar-
ket, and the details of the trade are often known only to the buyer and
seller.
In a decomposition of the random-walk variance, a nonpublic vari-
able may well possess strong explanatory power. This should be kept
in perspective. The variable’s contribution to σ2
w may accurately reﬂect
the economic value of the information to the few agents in possession.
It almost certainly overstates, however, the contribution that would arise
if the variable were made public. Forcing disclosure of the information
would change the incentives for its production. Futhermore, if the dis-
closure relates to the trading process (e.g., the disclosure of order attributes
or originator identiﬁcation), then disclosure will probably change trading
behavior.
Private information need not directly relate to security payoffs.
Section 5.6, for example, demonstrates that knowing that previous traders
were uninformed may be valuable. From a random-walk decomposi-
tion perspective, a price change that appears permanent conditional on
the public information set may be transitory when the expectation is
conditioned on private information.
This discussion ends on a note of caution. The techniques described
in this chapter allow us to identify variance components in the efﬁ-
cient price that are attributed to trades. The logic of the sequential
and strategic trade models broadly connect the trade-related variance
components to asymmetric information. The variance measures, and
other microstructure-based information asymmetry proxies, such as price
impact coefﬁcients and spreads, may readily be estimated in many impor-
tant settings. It is then tempting to use relate the cross-sectional and
time-series variation in these proxies to changes or differences in reg-
ulation, reporting, disclosure, or any events that might plausibly be
hypothesized to affect the information environment. Because stakes in
these questions are high, we emphasize that there is little corroborat-
ing evidence that these microstructure based proxies are meaningfully
connected to asymmetric information, at least as it pertains to securities’
cash ﬂows. Neal and Wheatley (1998) examine the spreads of closed-end
mutual funds. The most meaningful valuation number for these securities
is their net asset value. As this is publicly known, information asym-
metries are presumably low. Despite this, they carry substantial spreads.
Saar and Yu (2002) show that price-impact proxies for U.S. ﬁrms are not
reliably correlated with other informational variables. The proxies fur-
thermore exhibit time variation around index rebalancing periods, events
which should be unrelated to the ﬁrm’s cash ﬂows.


MULTIVARIATE LINEAR MICROSTRUCTURE MODELS
89
9.7
Implementation Issues
9.7.1
Timing and Signing
Typically the basic data consist of a time-stamped record of bid and ask
quotes and transactions. If the data originate in a limit order market, the
sequencing of events, in particular the interleaving of quote changes and
trades, is likely to be highly accurate. On the other hand, if the data arise
in a hybrid market, if the data follow different dissemination paths, if the
time stamps are not sufﬁciently precise, or if there are manual steps to the
process, the sequencing is likely to be suspect.
Relative timing of quotes and trades is important because the prevailing
quote midpoints are generally used to sign the trades (infer the direction
of the order, qt). If all executions occur at posted quotes, we set qt = +1
for a trade priced at the prevailing ask and qt = −1 for trades priced at
the bid. This is generally successful, however, only in limit order markets
(where the book can be accurately reconstructed), and then only when all
executions occur against visible (as opposed to hidden or reserve) limit
orders. More generally we might set qt = Sign(pt −mt), reasoning that a
trade priced above the quote midpoint is more likely to be buyer initiated.
Even this rule, however, leaves unclassiﬁed trades occurring exactly at the
midpoint. In some samples, this is a frequent occurrence. When this rule
fails, an alternative is to assign to the trade the sign of the most recent
price change.1
9.7.2
Signed Order Variables
The example structural model uses only one trade variable—the direc-
tion, qt. In most cases, the execution price and quantity of the trade are
known. Because most economic considerations suggest that larger orders
should have a higher information content, it makes sense to include
signed volumes and/or signed monotone transformations of volume.
Letting Vt denote the volume of the trade (in shares or value), the can-
didates would include qtVt, qt
√Vt, and so on. Hasbrouck (1991a) uses
signed-squared volumes (qtV 2
t ). This transformation, however, is likely to
amplify the effect of extreme dispersion of volumes (Gabaix et al. (2003)),
leading to unstable estimates. In general, convex transformations should
probably be avoided.
A VMA or VAR model applied to transformed data can capture cer-
tain nonlinear features while remaining computationally convenient.
The capabilities and limitations are similar to those associated with
linear regression on nonlinear functions of the explanatory variables.
That is, transformations can locally rescale additive linear effects but
cannot capture nonlinear interactions. For example, a speciﬁcation like


90
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
yi = (xi,1)a1(xi,2)a2 + εi can’t be reworked as yi = α1f1(xi,1) + α2f2(xi,2) + ηi
by artful choice of f1 and f2.
As a rough generalization, the estimated relation between order size
and price impact is concave, becoming ﬂat at large sizes (see, for exam-
ple, Kempf and Korn 1999). Although it might seem obvious that signed
order size should be included in the price change speciﬁcation, it often
contributes little incremental explanatory power above the signed trade
direction variable (Jones, Kaul, and Lipson (1994)). A possible explana-
tion for this draws on time variation in liquidity. If agents trade large
amounts when price impact is low, and small amounts when price impact
is high, the time-averaged price impact will appear relatively unaffected
by order size (Coppejans, Domowitz, and Madhavan (2001) Mendelson
and Tunca (2004). Barclay and Warner (1993) suggest that in U.S. equity
markets most price changes are attributable to medium-size trades.
9.7.3
Event Time or Wall-Clock Time?
In the discussion, the subscript t is assumed to index trades. Thus, t is an
event counter. Other possible event indexes are quote revisions or a mix
of trade and quote revisions (i.e., t is incremented whenever a trade occurs
or a quote is revised). Analyses can also be set in wall-clock time, with t
indexing ﬁxed intervals (e.g., minutes). With wall-clock time index, aggre-
gation or transformation is often necessary to handle (possibly multiple)
events occurring within the interval.
The choice depends on the goals of the analysis. If the analysis involves
a single security and the data are precisely time stamped, an event index
is probably the ﬁrst choice. The guiding principle here is that the process
is more likely to be covariance stationary in event time than in wall-clock
time.
If the microstructure-based estimates are to be subsequently used in
a cross-sectional analysis, though, comparability across securities may
become the dominant consideration. This may militate in favor of wall-
clock time. For example, volatility per minute is probably more compara-
ble across ﬁrms than volatility per trade. Breen, Hodrick, and Korajczyk
(2002) estimate the impact coefﬁcient with a simple linear speciﬁcation
using daily aggregate data.
9.7.4
Trade Prices or Quote Midpoints?
The speciﬁcations discussed to this point have generally assumed that
the pt are actual trade prices. If the analysis is aimed at characterizing
execution-related phenomena, like the pricing error variance or trade exe-
cution costs, this is the usually the correct choice. If the point of the study
is estimation of long-run price impact or the contribution of trades to the
efﬁcient price variance, then the bid-ask midpoint is a sensible alternative


MULTIVARIATE LINEAR MICROSTRUCTURE MODELS
91
price variable. Analysis of the present chapter’s structural model would
be more straightforward if it were based on [mt
qt] instead of [pt
qt].
Quotes have certain advantages over trade prices. Although they may
be revised sporadically, they are normally regarded as active between revi-
sions. A bid made at 10:01 A.M., for example, and next revised at 10:05 A.M.
would be considered current at 10:02, 10:03, and 10:04. The price of a trade
executed at 10:01 A.M. might well be stale by 10:02, even if it were still the
most recent transaction. This point is particularly important when a wall-
clock time scale is used. The quote prevailing at the end of an interval can
usually be precisely determined. Quotes can furthermore be revised in the
absence of trades. Because a quote setter’s bid and ask can be picked off in
response to new public information, there is a strong motivation to keep
them up to date. For this reason, they may be presumed to reﬂect current
public information more reliably that last-sale prices. Finally, trade prices
are subject to bid-ask bounce, a source of transitory volatility. Although
quote midpoints are not immune from transitory components, their short-
run volatility is lower than that of trades. (The long-run volatilities are,
of course, equal.) In this sense, quote midpoints are more precise price
estimates.
9.8
Other Structural Models
The structural model described in section 9.2 was chosen for illustra-
tion and exposition. The literature contains a number of other structural
models. The following are representative.
9.8.1
Glosten and Harris (1988)
Glosten and Harris (1988) (GH) estimate a model in which the efﬁcient
price is driven by the trade size (as well as the direction):
mt = mt−1 + wt
wt = ut + qt(λ0 + λ1Vt)
(9.26)
pt = mt + qt(c0 + c1Vt).
where Vt is the (unsigned) volume of the trade. The information content
of the trade is linear in size, as discussed earlier. The cost term is also
linear in size. The exercise that follows is based this representation of the
model.
GH actually estimate a version of this model that is distinctive in two
key respects. First, the model has a methodical treatment of price dis-
creteness. The pt given in equations (9.26) is latent. The observed price
is pt rounded to the nearest tick (in GH’s data, one-eighth of a dollar).
Second, the GH data do not contain bid and ask quotes, so the qt are latent


92
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
variables as well. GH base inference on rounded prices and Vt and estimate
the model using an innovative nonlinear ﬁltering procedure. With so
much of the model’s content unobserved, estimation requires stronger
distributional assumptions. GH treat Vt and qt as exogenous and assume
normality for the public information innovation ut.
Exercise 9.1 (VMA analysis of GH) In the model given by
equations (9.26), assume that the signed volume is Qt ∼N(0, σ2
Q).
Let qt = sgn(Qt) and Vt = |Qt|. pt and qt are observed (but mt is not).
a. Specify a VMA model yt = θ(L)εt for yt = [pt
qt
Qt]′ and θ(L) =
θ0 + θ1L. If x ∼N(0, σ2) then E|x| =

2σ2/π. Using this result to
compute Cov(qt, Qt), specify  = Var(εt).
b. Compute σ2
w
directly from the expression for wt
in equa-
tions (9.26). Verify that equation (9.22) gives the same answer.
c. Using alternative Cholesky decompositions, show that the amount
of σ2
w that is explained by the direction variable qt is (π −2)λ2
0/π
(when the ordering is Qt, qt, ut) and (λ0 + λ1σQ
√2/π)2. (when the
ordering is qt, Qt, ut). Hint: Although the covariance matrix is
3 × 3, the only off-diagonal elements are in the block containing
qt and Qt. Under either permutation this block is 2 × 2, so the
Cholesky decomposition may be computed using equation (9.17).
9.8.2
Madhavan, Richardson, and Roomans
Madhavan, Richardson, and Roomans (1997) (MRR) posit a model similar
to the structural model in section 9.2, except that the signed trades are
generated by an autoregressive process. Speciﬁcally, qt = ρqt−1 + vt. This
generates more persistent dependence than the moving average form.
Exercise 9.2 Suppose that the structural model is given by
mt = mt−1 + wt, wt = ut + λvt, qt = ρqt−1 + vt (where|ρ| < 1), and
pt = mt + cqt. Show that the resulting system for yt = [pt
qt] can
be written as a mixed vector autoregressive and moving average
(VARMA) model yt = ϕ1yt−1 + ϕ2yt−2 + θ0εt + θ1εt−1 where
εt = [ut
vt]′ and  =
σ2
u
0
0
σ2
v

. For a VARMA model of the form
φ(L)yt = θ(L)εt, σ2
w = AA′ where A is the ﬁrst row of [φ(1)]−1θ(1).
Verify that this gives the structurally correct expression for σ2
w.
9.9
Estimating Price Impact from
Returns and Volume
The speciﬁcations discussed in this chapter regress returns against order
ﬂow that has been signed as to buyer- or seller-initiated. The sign is usually


MULTIVARIATE LINEAR MICROSTRUCTURE MODELS
93
inferred by comparing high-frequency trade and quote prices. Many sam-
ples, particularly long-term historical databases, however, only include
returns and (unsigned) volume aggregated over daily or longer intervals.
These data can also be used to estimate price impact measures, but the
estimates are necessarily best viewed as proxies.
If the true price impact model is pt = λxt + ut where xt is the series
signed trades, then inference about λ based on |pt| and |xt| (the trade vol-
ume) is supported under certain distributional assumptions. In particular,
if pt and xt are bivariate normal, then |pt| and |xt| are jointly bivariate
half-normal. E[|pt|||xt|] is nonlinear, but of a known form, and estima-
tion of λ could proceed (see Kotz, Balakrishnan, and Johnson (2000) also
the correction at Mathstatica (2005)). Normality, however, is likely to be
a poor assumption in most samples of returns and volumes. Furthermore,
no simple analogous relation characterizes data that are time-aggregated.
There are a number of approaches to quantifying the contemporaneous
return-volume relationship. The liquidity ratio is the time-series average
L = (|Volt|/|rt|) where t typically indexes days and the average is over all
days in the month or quarter for which the return is nonzero. It is also
sometimes called the Amivest liquidity ratio, after the now-defunct man-
agement ﬁrm that developed it. Amihud (2002) suggests the illiquidity
ratio I = (|rt|/|Volt|), where the average is over all days with nonzero vol-
ume. Both estimates are prone to extreme values, although the illiquidity
ratio, due to the presence of volume in the denominator, is somewhat
more stable. Hasbrouck (2005) ﬁnds that in the cross section, both mea-
sures are moderately positively correlated with λ coefﬁcients estimated
from high-frequency data, but that the illiquidity measure appears to be
the better proxy. Besides Amihud (2002), illiquidity ratios have been used
in asset pricing speciﬁcations by Acharya and Pedersen (2005).


10
10
Multiple Securities and Multiple Prices
Markets for different securities often interact. The standard theory of
portfolio optimization is built on the assumption that securities share
common-factor value determinants. The value of a derivative securities
is generally linked to its underlying asset by arbitrage possibilities.
The trading process may reﬂect these long-term interactions and may
exhibit other dependencies as well. Trades may be correlated for non-
informational reasons. A trader buying into an index, for example, will
place orders in many or all stocks of the index. A trade in stock A, for
example, that conveys information about a factor that is also a value deter-
minant of stock B may move the price of B. Arbitrage, too, usually requires
trading.
The starting point for this chapter is models formed by simply stack-
ing single-security speciﬁcations like those described in earlier chapters.
These are useful, for example, in modeling the joint behavior of two stocks
in the same industry or the joint dynamics of a stock and an index. The
stacking approach fails, though, when we have multiple prices for the
same security (like a bid and an ask, or the bid in two different trading
venues) or when the securities being modeled are linking by arbitrage.
To handle these cases, the chapter describes error correction models and
the role of cointegration. Engle and Granger (1987) provide a formal
analysis of cointegration; Hamilton (1994, Ch. 19) is a textbook presen-
tation; Hasbrouck (1995) discusses microstructure applications.
10.1
Stacked Models of Multiple Prices
Consider a structural model of two stocks with Roll dynamics:
mit = mi,t−1 + uit
pit = mit + cqit
for i = 1, 2.
(10.1)
94


MULTIPLE SECURITIES AND MULTIPLE PRICES
95
We might allow for dependence between the uit arising from common
value components or between the qit (reﬂecting commonality in purchases
and sales). The observations are the price changes pt = [p1t
p2t]′.
Suppose that the ui,t values are uncorrelated white-noise processes:
Eu1tu2t = 0 and Eu2
it = σ2
u = 1. The trade directions are correlated, however,
with Eq1tq2t = ρ. The vector autocovariances are then
Ŵ0 ≡Var(pt) =

2c2 + σ2
u
ρc2
ρc2
2c2 + σ2
u

;
(10.2)
Ŵ1 ≡Cov(pt, pt−1) =

−c2
−ρc2
−ρc2
−c2

,
with Ŵk = 0 for |k| > 1. These imply a VMA of the form pt = θ(L)εt where
θ(L) = I + θ1L.
The VMA parameters may be obtained by equating the autocovariances
implied by the structural and MA representations (following the same
logic as in the univariate case). The expressions for the VMA parameters in
terms of the structural ones are complicated and not particularly intuitive.
So we continue with speciﬁc numeric values σ2
u = 1, c = 10, and ρ = 0.9.
With these parameters the VMA parameters are
θ1 =

−0.830
−0.100
−0.100
−0.830

and
 = Var(εt) =

109.0
95.3
95.3
109.0

.
(10.3)
The variance-covariance matrix of the random-walk components is
θ(1)θ(1)′. Using (10.3), this is equal to 2 × 2 identity matrix. This is struc-
turally correct: The efﬁcient price innovations (the uit) have unit variance,
and they are uncorrelated.
We next seek to determine security 1’s contribution to the efﬁcient
price variance of security 2. This question requires a bit of explanation.
According to the structural model, this contribution is zero. But in an
empirical situation we would be working from an estimate of the VMA
representation. Because  is not diagonal, the variance decomposition
requires a Cholesky factorization. With the given ordering (security 1 ﬁrst),
the Cholesky factorization is  = F′F, where
F′ =

10.44
0
9.13
5.07

.
(10.4)
The ﬁrst row of θ(1)F′ is [θ(1)F′]1 = [0.862
−0.507]. The random-walk
variance decomposition for the ﬁrst stock is (0.862)2 + (0.507)2 = 0.743 +


96
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
0.257 = 1, implying that 74.3% of stock 1’s random-walk variance Var(u1t)
is explained by its own innovations, and 25.7% is explained by the
innovations in the other stock (and the reverse holds for stock 2).
These results are surprising. The statistical model seems to imply
(incorrectly) that the efﬁcient price for stock 1 is partially driven by
stock 2. Although this conclusion is misleading, it has a sensible expla-
nation. For stock 1, the ﬁltered state estimate is:
f1t = E∗
m1t|pt, pt−1, . . .

= p1t −cE∗
q1t|pt, pt−1, . . .

.
The history of p2t is useful in predicting m1t because it helps predict
q2t, and by virtue of the correlated trade directions, q2t is useful in
predicting q1t.
Does the model “get it right?” If the two securities are U.S. stocks, it
would be likely that the mit would be closely proxied by the publicly
known quote midpoints. Market participants would see these midpoints
evolving independently. The interdependence captured in the model
does not, therefore, characterize agents’ beliefs. It is an artifact of the
econometrician’s limited information set.
10.2
Cointegrated Prices
The stacked security model has interdependent price dynamics, but as the
dependencies arise from correlated trade directions, they are inherently
transient. The same VMA and VAR models would also be appropriate,
though, if we had allow correlation in the efﬁcient price changes. As long
as |Corr(u1t, u2t)| < 1, each price would evolve, at least in part, indepen-
dently of the other. This means that in the long run, the prices of the two
stocks would diverge, in principle without bound.
There are many situations, though, where the prices are so closely
linked by economic factors that boundless divergence is an unattractive
feature of the model. Bid and ask quotes on the same security, for exam-
ple, reﬂect a single common value plus trade-related costs that may vary,
but in a stationary fashion. Bids for the same security quoted in different
market venues are like to vary considerably but not diverge relative to
each other. Absence of divergence also characterizes bid, ask, and trade
prices.
Other restrictions on long-run divergence arise from arbitrage.
Forward/spot parity, for example, states that the forward price is equal to
the spot price plus the cost of carry. Violations of this condition present
arbitrage opportunities. If the arbitrage would incur trading costs, we
would not expect the parity relationship to hold exactly and uniformly.


MULTIPLE SECURITIES AND MULTIPLE PRICES
97
An increasing divergence between forward and spot prices would, how-
ever, run up against arbitrage. A similar principle applies to the prices of
options and their underlying assets, as long as appropriate correction is
made for nonlinearities in the valuation relationship.
When two or more variables individually follow random walk–like
(formally, “integrated”) processes, but there exists a linear combination
of them that is stationary, the variables are said to be cointegrated. The bid
and ask for a stock, for example, are both dominated by random walks. The
difference between them, the spread, is approximately stationary. Engle
and Granger (1987) provide a formal analysis of cointegration; Hamil-
ton (1994, Ch. 19) is a textbook presentation; Hasbrouck (1995) discusses
microstructure applications.
In the presence of cointegration, the statistical models we’ve used
to this point must be modiﬁed. VARs especially exhibit speciﬁcation
problems. Fortunately, simple modiﬁcations usually clear up matters.
10.2.1
The Structural Model
The problems and remedies can be illustrated with a simple structural
model.
mt = mt−1 + ut
p1t = mt + c qt
(10.5)
p2t = mt−1.
There is one efﬁcient price mt that is common to both prices. The ﬁrst
price is generated by the usual Roll mechanism. The second price has no
bid-ask spread, but uses an efﬁcient price that is one period stale. This
model can be motivated as a description of trading in a primary market
and a crossing market (discussed in section 2.6). The second price is the
quote midpoint in the primary market, lagged to reﬂect transmission and
processing delays.
10.2.2
The VMA Representation
Both prices are integrated (contain random-walk components), but
p1t −p2t = ut + cqt is stationary. Thus, the prices are cointegrated. By
direct inspection, the vector time series pt has a VMA(1) representation
pt = θ∗
0ε∗
t + θ∗
1ε∗
t−1, where
θ∗
0 =

1
c
0
0

, θ∗
1 =

0
−c
1
0

, and ε∗
t =

ut
qt

.
(10.6)
This form is not very useful, however. It is not invertible, that is, it cannot
be transformed into a VAR. Nor can it be reworked into a standard VMA


98
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
form, such as pt = εt + θ1εt−1. (The device used in section 9.2 does not
work because θ∗
0 is singular.)
There is an alternative VMA representation. The autocovariances of
pt are:
Ŵ0 =

2c2 + σ2
u
0
0
σ2
u

;
Ŵ1 =

−c2
0
σ2
u
0

;
and Ŵk = 0 for
k
 > 1.
(10.7)
The alternative VMA is obtained by equating the autocovariances implied
by the general form pt = εt + θ1εt−1 and  = Var(εt) to the autocovari-
ances given in (10.7), and solving. We obtain:
θ1 =

c2 + σ2
u
−1

−c2
c2
σ2
u
−σ2
u

 = Var(εt) =


2c2 + σ2
u −
c4
c2 + σ2u
c2σ2
u
c2 + σ2u
c2σ2
u
c2 + σ2u
c2σ2
u
c2 + σ2u

.
(10.8)
As in the noncointegrated models, we consider the forecast:
ft = lim
k→∞E∗[pt+k|pt, Pt−1, . . . .] = pt + E∗[pt+1|εt, εt−1, . . . ]
= pt + θ1εt.
The forecast has the usual ﬁltering interpretation ft = E∗[mt|pt, pt−1, . . . ].
The ﬁrst difference is:
ft = [I + θ1] εt =

c2 + σ2
u
−1

σ2
u
c2
σ2
u
c2

εt.
(10.9)
Note that the rows of ft are identical. This implies that the two projected
efﬁcient prices have identical dynamics, that is, that the same ﬁltered
efﬁcient price underlies both securities. It is true that this is a feature of
the structural model, but the important point is that this commonality is
uncovered on the basis of the VMA representation.
Exercise 10.1 Suppose that σ2
u = 1 and c = 2 Using Cholesky factoriza-
tions with the two possible orderings, show that ε1t (i.e., the innova-
tion from the ﬁrst price) explains between 20% and 55.9% of σ2
u. (Both
prices are informative about mt. The ﬁrst price is based on the current
mt but impounds the bid/ask bounce error. The second price has no
bid/ask bounce noise, but is based on mt−1. As c gets large, the infor-
mation share of the ﬁrst market declines; as c declines, the informa-
tion share of the ﬁrst market increases.)


MULTIPLE SECURITIES AND MULTIPLE PRICES
99
10.2.3
Autoregressive Representations
For most of the VMA models considered up to this point, the VAR is an
alternative representation that is particularly convenient for estimation.
Here, though, if we attempt to determine the VAR coefﬁcients, ϕ(L) in
ϕ(L)pt = εt, by the usual method of series expansion of (I + θ1L)−1, we
get an unpleasant surprise. The leading terms of the expansion are:
ϕ(L) = I +

c2 + σ2
u
−1

c2
−c2
−σ2
u
σ2
u

L +

c2
−c2
−σ2
u
σ2
u

L2
+

c2
−c2
−σ2
u
σ2
u

L3 + · · ·

.
Apparently, the coefﬁcients of the VAR representation do not converge.
This difﬁculty is not speciﬁc to the present structural model. When vari-
ables are cointegrated, no convergent VAR representation exists for the
ﬁrst-differences.1
Fortunately, a modiﬁed version of the VAR does exist. This is the vector
error correction model (VECM). The “error correction” attribute refers to
a common early use of these speciﬁcations, the modeling of dynamic sys-
tems in disequilibrium. To build the VECM, note ﬁrst that a VAR does in
fact exist for the price levels. Because pt = (1 −L)pt, the VMA represen-
tation becomes (1 −L)pt = θ(L)εt. A VAR level representation, φ(L)pt = εt,
would have the property that φ(L) = θ(L)−1(1 −L). Direct computation of
this yields:
φ(L) = I −φ1L
where φ1 =

c2 + σ2
u
−1

σ2
u
c2
σ2
u
c2

.
(10.10)
We may work back to ﬁrst differences as:
pt = φ1pt−1 + εt
pt = pt −pt−1 = (φ1 −I)pt−1 + εt
=

c2 + σ2
u
−1

−c2
c2
σ2
u
−σ2
u

pt−1 + εt
(10.11)
=

c2 + σ2
u
−1

−c2
σ2
u

[1
−1] pt−1 + εt.
Finally,
pt = βzt + εt
where β =

c2 + σ2
u
−1

−c2
σ2
u

and zt = p1t −p2t.
(10.12)
This is a VECM, and βzt is the error correction term. zt is the combination
of two prices that is stationary. It is the error, not in the sense of any


100
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
disequilibrium, but rather in the sense of discrepancy. β is the matrix of
adjustment coefﬁcients. If zt > 0, the error correction term implies that p1t
will drop and p2t will rise.
The present structural model is only illustrative, and as such exhibits
some special features. The right-hand side of a VECM typically contains
terms in lagged ﬁrst differences (pt−1, pt−2, . . .). Given the absence of
these terms, the error is eliminated in one step. The normalization of the
error is natural but arbitrary. By appropriate scaling of β, we could have
deﬁned the error as p2t −p1t or (p2t −p1t)/5.
The relative magnitudes of the adjustment coefﬁcients suggest some-
thing about price discovery and leadership. In a sense, the process is like
a bargaining situation in which the two sides each concede something to
reach agreement. The party that makes the smaller concession (changes
position by the smallest amount) is the stronger. The party that moves the
most is the weaker.
10.3
General VECM Speciﬁcations
10.3.1
Multiple Prices
We consider the case where there are n prices for a single security. In
many applications, the prices arise from n different trading venues. The
VECM has the general form
pt = φ1pt−1 + φ2pt−2 + · · · + β(zt−1 −b) + εt,
(10.13)
where pt is the n × 1 vector of prices. A convenient expression for the
error is:
zt−1
(n−1)×1
=


p1,t−1 −p2,t−1
p1,t−1 −p3,t−1
...
p1,t−1 −pn−1,t−1


= A′pt−1
where A′ =


1
−1
0
· · ·
0
1
0
−1
· · ·
0
...
1
0
· · ·
−1


.
(10.14)
Each component of zt−1 is a difference relative to the ﬁrst price. It
is convenient to order the prices so that the presumptively dominant
one appears ﬁrst. This facilitates interpretation of the β coefﬁcients as
speed-of-adjustment parameters toward the ﬁrst price. From a statistical
viewpoint, however, the ordering is arbitrary. The essential properties of


MULTIPLE SECURITIES AND MULTIPLE PRICES
101
the model are also unaffected if A is replaced by AP, where P is any non-
singular square matrix of order n −1. Formally, A is considered a linear
basis for the set of cointegrating vectors.
The b in the error correction term is an (n −1) column vector of mean
errors. From an economic perspective, the mean error is the target of the
adjustment process. For example, if pt = [askt
bidt]′, we’d expect the
difference zt = askt −bidt to tend toward the long-run average spread.
Equation (10.13) suggests a recursive procedure for forecasting. To
construct impulse response functions, we set lagged price changes and
disturbances to zero and work forward from an initial speciﬁed shock
εt. By successively computing the impulse response functions for unit
shocks in each variable, we may obtain the VMA representation for the
price changes pt = θ(L)εt.
We may posit for the n prices a random-walk decomposition of the form
pt
(n×1)
= mt ×
ι
(n×1)
+
st
(n×1)
where mt = mt−1 + wt,
(10.15)
where ι is a vector of ones. It is important to note that mt is a scalar: The
random-walk (“efﬁcient price”) component is the same for all prices in
the model. The random-walk variance is: σ2
w = [θ(1)]1[θ(1)]′
1, where [ · ]1
denotes the ﬁrst row of the matrix. One property developed earlier for the
structural model, however, is general: The rows of θ(1) are identical. (In
the computation of σ2
w, the ﬁrst row is as good as any.)
The random-walk variance decomposition was introduced in section
8.6. Letting d = [θ(1)]1F′ where F is the Cholesky factor of (= F′F),
σ2
w =  d2
i . In the context of section 8.6, the variance decomposition is
used to make informational attributions about a diverse set of variables
(such as prices and trades). Here, all variables are prices, but the princi-
ples are identical. The absolute contribution of the ith price’s innovations
to the common efﬁcient price is d2
i . We may also compute a relative con-
tribution, d2
i /σ2
w. In the context of a model of multiple prices, the relative
contribution is also known as price i’s information share.
Cholesky factorization was used in section 9.4 to impose a causal order-
ing that was supported by economic logic (trades ﬁrst). In multiple price
analyses, however, one usually tries to preserve balance in the analysis by
treating all prices symmetrically. In practice, this suggests calculating and
reporting for each information share the minimum and maximum over all
causal permutations.
Random-walk variance decompositions are probably more important
here than in any other microstructure application. VECM models are often
estimated for trade prices or quotes from different, competing trading
venues. The venue with the largest information share is in some ways
the most important. In a statistical sense, it is the price leader. Loosely
speaking, the prices of other markets tend to follow its moves. It is the
venue where most value-relevant information is ﬁrst revealed. The social


102
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
welfare importance of an informationally efﬁcient price is appreciated by
regulators. The dominant market can assert that it is the largest producer
of an important social good and can make a case for regulatory preference
based on something other than self-interest.
The VECM framework suggests other measures of market importance.
One approach suggests measuring contributions by the elements of β =
θ(1)1/ι′θ(1)1, that is, the long-run VMA coefﬁcients normalized to sum
to unity. This vector has some interesting properties. In the permanent/
transitory decomposition deﬁned by pt = m∗
t ι + s∗
t where m∗
t = β′pt, it may
be shown that s∗
t has no long-run effect on m∗
t . This permanent/transitory
decomposition was originally suggested in a macroeconomic context by
Gonzalo and Granger (1995)(GG). Chu, Hsieh, and Tse (1999) and Harris,
McInish, and Wood (2002b) use the decomposition in microstructure ana-
lyses. The general properties and relative merits of information shares and
GG factor components are discussed in a special issue of the Journal of
Financial Markets containing Baillie et al. (2002), de Jong (2002), Harris,
McInish, and Wood (2002a,b), Hasbrouck (2002), and Lehmann (2002).
10.3.2
Extensions
The basic price VECM easily accommodates several useful generaliza-
tions. We might expand the system to include other variables in addition
to the cointegrated prices. These other variables might include orders asso-
ciated with the cointegrated prices or prices of other securities (as long
as they are not cointegrated with the original set of prices). An extended
VECM of this sort would look like:
yt = φ1yt−1 + φ2yt−2 + · · · + β(b −zt−1)εt
where yt =

pt
xt

and xt =

qt
p∗
t

.
(10.16)
The qt includes one or more order variables, and p∗
t contains the changes
of the noncointegrated prices.
10.3.3
Testing and Estimating Cointegrating Vectors
The present discussion of cointegration has neglected several aspects of
the topic that are usually accorded great attention in treatments motivated
by macroeconomic applications. In macroeconomic analysis, testing for
cointegration is important because the considerations that might cause
it to arise are often not transparent. In microstructure analysis, however,
cointegration or its absence tends to be an obvious structural feature.


MULTIPLE SECURITIES AND MULTIPLE PRICES
103
The discussion has proceeded on the assumption that we know the
cointegrating vectors, such as the price difference in the simple struc-
tural model (section 10.2) or the basis for the cointegrating vectors (A in
equation (10.14)). In practice, this is almost always the case. The bids,
asks, trade prices, and so on, even from multiple trading venues, for a
single security cannot reasonably diverge without bound. In applications
involving index arbitrage, the weights of the component prices are set by
the deﬁnition of the index, and are known to practitioner and econome-
trician alike. (Of course, it might be easier, particularly in an exploratory
analysis, to estimate the weights, rather than look them up.)
10.3.4
Pairs Trading
The previous remarks notwithstanding, there is one practical situation,
in which the testing and estimation of cointegration vectors is important.
Pairs trading is the strategy of identifying two securities or commodities
with relative prices that are constant in the long run but exhibit consider-
able variation in the short run. When the relative prices diverge from the
long-run value, one buys the (relatively) undervalued security/commodity
and sells (or sells short) the overvalued (Gatev, Goetzmann and
Rouwenhorst (2006)). The ratio of gold and silver prices, for example,
arises in the analysis of commodities trading strategies.
Lest formal cointegration theory appear to put these strategies on a
sound methodological footing, two potential problems should be noted.
The ﬁrst concerns data-snooping biases. The nominal size of a cointe-
gration test (probability of incorrectly rejecting the null hypothesis of no
cointegration) is likely to understate the true size if the price pair has been
selected from a large number of candidates due to a history of “interest-
ing” comovement. The second problem is that structural breaks can play
havoc with the forecasts of cointegrated models. This is particularly true
of breaks in the long-run means of the errors. What may look like extreme
misvaluation on the basis of historical estimates may actually represent
convergence to a new equilibrium point (Clements and Hendry (1999)
Doornik and Hendry (1997)).
10.4
Time
The preceding chapter noted that in a single-security analysis, it is often
useful to let t index events (e.g., trades). This is tenable because when
the pace of trading accelerates, all events (trades, quote revisions, etc.)
also occur more frequently. In a two-security model, though, if we let t
index times when trades occur in both securities, we will end up throw-
ing out trades that occur in one security only. If we let t index trades in
either security, trades that occur sequentially in one security may wind up
being separated by many intervals if there were intervening trades in the


104
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
other security. In these models, then, event time is awkward. The common
frame of reference provided by wall-clock time is more attractive.
If the speciﬁcation is to be estimated in wall-clock time, what interval
should be used? The precision of the time stamps (e.g., one second in
TAQ data) sets a lower limit on the interval length. It is always possible
to aggregate up to longer intervals, however, and analyses of this sort may
use intervals of one minute or longer.
In most situations, aggregation reduces the information in a sample. In
a VECM price discovery model, this loss is reﬂected in the disturbance
covariance matrix . Time aggregation may make events that are actually
separated in time to appear contemporaneous. This leads to larger off-
diagonal covariances in . When  is diagonal, the information shares are
precisely determined. As the off-diagonal elements increase in size, the
information shares become more sensitive to the causal ordering imposed
by the Cholesky factorizations. Over all causal permutations, the upper
and lower bounds for the information shares will become wider. A shorter
time interval is desirable, therefore, because it generally implies tighter
bounds.
However, a short time interval has some apparent inconveniences.
First, it is necessary to propagate prices past the time of their initial post-
ing. For example, suppose that t indexes one-second intervals, a bid of
100 is posted at 10:00:15, and a bid of 101 is posted at 10:01:00. In the
observation matrix, a price of 100 will entered at 10:00:15, 10:00:16, . . .,
10:00:59. For bid and ask quotes, this is a sensible procedure because
quotes in most markets are regarded as active and ﬁrm until withdrawn
or revised. Suppose, however, that the prices are trade prices. A trade
occurs at a particular time, and it cannot be suggested that the trade is
repeated each second until a fresh transaction is recorded. Propagation
of the trade price can still be justiﬁed, however, by interpreting the ﬁlled
price series as a record of “last sales.” The economic relevance of last sale
prices is suggested by the fact that they are widely disseminated in market
data streams and are in fact often displayed with no indication of the trade
time. Last sale prices are also used for purposes of index computation.
Second, a side effect of propagating price levels is that the series of price
changes may contain many zero observations. This should not suggest
model misspeciﬁcation. The VMA, VAR, and VECM speciﬁcations rest on
the Wold theorem and covariance stationarity, neither of which preclude
a data series dominated by zeros (or any other value).
Finally, a VECM speciﬁed for short intervals may have an exces-
sively large number of parameters. For example, suppose that we wish
to describe dynamics over one minute for a set of ﬁve prices with one-
second resolution. Each coefﬁcient matrix in the VECM will be 5 × 5, and
there will be 60 such matrices, implying that the VECM will have at least
1,500 parameters. The parameter space can be greatly reduced, however,
by the use of polynomial distributed lags.


MULTIPLE SECURITIES AND MULTIPLE PRICES
105
When integrating data from multiple markets, one is often reliant on
the time stamps provided by the markets. The quality of the time stamps
depends on the accuracy of internal systems clocks, latencies in data pro-
cessing and transmission, and the nominal reporting precision. Trading
in some markets occurs are such a rapid pace that often multiple events
are reported in the same second. When this happens, the sequencing of
reporting is suspect.
Beyond a certain point, precise determination of when an event like
a trade actually occurred is often a hopeless endeavor, involving con-
siderations of when Smith transmitted a commitment or Jones received
an acknowledgment. For many purposes, though, it sufﬁces to determine
when knowledge of an event entered the public awareness. This is, after
all, the point when agents’ information sets are updated. For this purpose,
it is appropriate to use the timing and sequencing as reported in the real-
time consolidated data feed. Most microstructure data sets are based on
such sources and preserve the source timing.


11
11
Dealers and Their Inventories
Dealers, brieﬂy discussed in section 2.3, are professional intermediaries.
The descriptions of dealer behavior to this point have focused on their
recovery of noninformational operating costs (via c in the Roll model)
and their pricing under asymmetric information. This chapter examines
other aspects of the dealer’s role and behavior.
The discussion ﬁrst considers the inventory control models. These
analyses (which generally predate the asymmetric information models)
essentially view the securities dealer as being similar in key respects to a
dealer in any other commodity. Normally a vendor maintains an inven-
tory to accommodate randomly arriving purchasers. A securities dealer,
of course, must also accommodate randomly arriving sellers and in fact
must replenish inventory by buying from these sellers. This complicates
the inventory management problem. Control relies on order arrival rates
that are sensitive to the prices posted by the dealer.
The inventory control models predict that the dealer will have a pre-
ferred inventory level. Such a preference, though, may also arise from
risk aversion. The discussion develops this point, its implications for
dealer quotes, and multisecurity extensions. The discussion then exam-
ines some of the evidence on dealer positions and statistical issues that
arise in analyzing the dynamics of these positions.
In going through these analyses, it should be kept in mind that most
of the analyses that focus on the behavior of dealers were developed in
an era when the institutional distinctions between dealers and customers
were sharper than they are at present. Fortunately, many of the analyses
originally developed as models of dealers (in a narrowly deﬁned sense)
are also relevant for the more numerous agents whom we might describe
as customers acting as dealers.
106


DEALERS AND THEIR INVENTORIES
107
11.1
Inventory Control
11.1.1
Garman (1976)
Garman (1976) suggests that a dealer is needed because buyers and sell-
ers do not arrive synchronously. In his model, buyers and sellers arrive
randomly in continuous time, as Poisson/exponential arrival processes
(section 6.1), and transact a single quantity. The arrival intensity for buy-
ers is λBuy(p), a function of the price they pay. The arrival intensity for
sellers is λSell(p), a function of the price they receive. These functions are
depicted in ﬁgure 11.1. They describe demand and supply, but not in the
usual static sense. Market clearing in this context means that buyers and
sellers arrive at the same average rate, that is, with the same intensity.
If the dealer were to quote the same price to buyers and sellers, market
clearing would occur where the intensity functions cross. This is deﬁned
by λBuy(pEq) = λSell(pEq) = λEq. As long as the intensities are the same, the
dealer is on average buying and selling at the same rate.
If the dealer is buying and selling at the same price, of course, there is
no proﬁt. If the dealer quotes an ask price to the buyers and a bid quote to
the sellers, he will make the spread on every unit turned over (the “turn”).
The dealer’s average proﬁt (trading revenue) per unit time is:
π

Bid, Ask

=

Ask −Bid

λBuy 
Ask

=

Ask −Bid

λSell 
Bid

,
(11.1)
where we have maintained the condition that is λBuy(Ask) = λSell(Bid),
that is, supply and demand balance (on average). Setting a wide spread
increases the proﬁt on each trade but depresses the rate of arrivals.
Figure 11.1.
Arrival rates of buyers and sellers.


108
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
The proﬁts are deﬁned by the shaded rectangle in ﬁgure 11.1. The dealer
sets the bid and ask to maximize this area.
Exercise 11.1 Suppose that the (inverse) intensity functions are
given by p(λBuy) = 3 −λBuy + 0.2(λBuy)2 and p(λSell) = 2 + 0.2λSell +
0.2(λSell)2, where the units of λBuy and λSell are arrivals per minute.
Determine the equilibrium price and arrival rate. Determine the
dealer’s optimal bid and ask and the average proﬁt per minute.
To accommodate the asynchronous buying and selling, the dealer
needs to maintain buffer stocks of the security and cash. The key con-
straint is that the dealer’s inventories of the security and cash cannot
drop below given levels, taken without loss of generality to be zero. If
λBuy(Ask) = λSell(Bid), holdings of stock follow a zero-drift random walk.
Cash holdings follow a positive-drift random walk (due to the turn).
Garman points out that in this case, the dealer is eventually ruined
with probability one. (A zero-drift random walk will eventually hit any
ﬁnite barrier with probability one.) Furthermore, with realistic parameter
values, the expected time to ruin is a matter of days.
The dealer in this variant of the Garman model sets the bid and ask
prices once and for all. As he sees an inventory barrier approaching, he
simply watches and hopes that the barrier isn’t hit. Commenting on the
short expected failure times implied by this strategy under realistic param-
eter values, Garman notes, “The order of magnitude makes it clear that the
specialists [dealers] must pursue a policy of relating their prices to their
inventories in order to avoid failure.” This statement lays out the intuition
behind the inventory control principle. The essential mechanism is that
dealers change their bid and ask quotes to elicit an expected imbalance
of buy and sell orders to push their inventories in the direction of their
preferred long-run position.
Before discussing this mechanism further, we note that ruins do occur
(market makers occasionally fail), but these are infrequent events. They
generally arise because security inventories are levered (partially ﬁnanced
with debt). A sudden price movement triggers a default in the dealer’s bor-
rowing arrangements. In a sense, ruin is caused not by moving inventory
hitting a ﬁxed barrier but by a moving barrier hitting the existing level of
inventory. The relationship between credit and liquidity is modeled by
Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005).
11.1.2
Amihud and Mendelson (1980)
The Amihud and Mendelson (1980) model has much in common with
the Garman framework. There is a monopolistic dealer. Buyers and sellers
come to the market asynchronously, as Poisson arrivals where the arrival
intensities depend on the posted quotes. The market maker’s inventory of


DEALERS AND THEIR INVENTORIES
109
the security is constrained to lie between given upper and lower bounds,
which may be thought of as arising from credit constraints. The market
maker maximizes expected proﬁts per unit time.
The model has a number of important predictions. First, the dealer has
a preferred inventory level lying between the two extremes. This arises
from the opportunity cost of being at an extreme point. As the dealer’s
position nears the upper boundary, for example, he must set the bid quote
to lessen (and at the boundary, force to zero) the expected arrival rate for
customer sell orders. Similar considerations come into play near the lower
boundary. When the arrival rate is low on either side of the market, the
rate at which the dealer earns the bid-ask spread is also low.
Figure 11.2 depicts the relation between the inventory position and
bid/ask prices. It is clear that:
• Bid and ask are monotone decreasing functions of the inventory
level.
• There is a positive spread.
• The spread is increasing in distance from preferred position.
• The quotes are not set symmetrically about the “true” value.
Implicit in the ﬁgure is another important prediction. Because bids and
asks are depend only on the inventory level, and the inventory level is
mean reverting toward the preferred position, the price effects of inventory
imbalances are transient.
Price
(Preferred position)
J
Inventory
level
Pa
Pb
Pa
Pb
∆
∆






Figure 11.2.
The dependence of bid and ask prices on inventory
position.


110
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
11.2
Risk Aversion and Dealer Behavior
In the Amihud and Mendelson model, an extreme inventory position
depresses the expected proﬁts of a risk-neutral dealer. Aversion to extreme
positions may also arise, however, due to simple risk aversion on the part
of the dealer. That is, a dealer can be viewed much as any other risk-averse
expected utility maximizer who forms a portfolio. The distinction is that
in disseminating a bid or offer quote, the dealer is allowing for the possi-
bility of a shock to his portfolio. If the dealer is initially at his portfolio
optimum, he will set the bid and offer prices to impound compensation
for being pulled off his optimum, if the bid or offer is hit. To illustrate, we
consider a version of a model originally due to Stoll (1978).
The framework assumes a risky asset with a normally distributed pay-
off and an agent (the dealer) with an exponential utility function. This
setup is often used in economic modeling, and because exponential util-
ity exhibits constant absolute risk aversion (CARA), it is often called the
“CARA-normal” framework. The agent’s preferences over ﬁnal wealth W
are given by U(W) = −e−αW . He chooses a strategy to maximize expected
utility EU(W). Under normality, that is, if W ∼N(µW , σ2
W ), then expected
utility simpliﬁes to EU(W) = −e−αµW + α2σ2
W /2.1 To optimize this, it sufﬁces
to maximize αµW −α2σ2
W /2, or equivalently to maximize the certainty
equivalent CE(µW , σ2
W ) = µW −α σ2
W /2.
Returning to the dealer’s problem, we assume that the security has
random payoff X ∼N(µX, σ2
X) and that all borrowing and lending is at
a zero rate of interest. Prior to bidding or offering the dealer holds n
units (shares) of the security (not necessarily an optimum), with n < 0
corresponding to a short position. Now suppose that he posts a bid B
for one share. If the bid is not hit, his terminal wealth is W = nX. If
the bid is hit, he acquires one more share for which he pays B, and
W = (n + 1)X −B. For the dealer to be indifferent to an execution, his
certainty equivalent must be the same whether or not his bid is hit:
CE(nµX, n2σ2
X) = CE((n + 1)µX −B, (n + 1)2σ2
X). This equivalence implies
B = µx −(2n + 1)ασ2
x/2.
(11.2)
The bid is equal to the expected payoff plus or minus a differential. If the
dealer starts out with n > −1/2 (allowing for fractional holdings) the bid
depends inversely on σ2
X and α. If the initial position is n < −1/2, how-
ever, the dealer bids above the expected payoff, and the excess depends
positively on σ2
X and α.
Setting the bid to maintain the expected utility whether or not the bid
is hit is optimal, however, only if the dealer already holds an optimal
number of shares. Suppose that prior to bidding, the dealer can buy or
sell the security at a notional price P. (Stoll suggests that P be viewed
as the dealer’s subjective valuation.) The dealer’s terminal wealth, then
(assuming zero initial endowments of shares and cash), is W = n(X −P).


DEALERS AND THEIR INVENTORIES
111
Maximizing the certainty equivalent of this over n gives the optimal
holdings as n∗= (µX −P)/(ασ2
X). Substituting this for n in equation (11.2)
gives B = P −ασ2
X/2. This value of B leaves the dealer indifferent between
execution and remaining at his optimum.
An advantage of incorporating risk aversion into the analysis is that
it highlights the role of correlation in market making across multiple
securities. To illustrate this, suppose that there are two risky securities
with payoffs X ∼N(µ, ), where X and µ are column vectors and  is the
payoff covariance matrix. If the holdings are n = [n1
n2]′, then the ter-
minal wealth is W = n′X, so µW = n′µ and σ2
W = n′n. The dealer makes
a bid B1 for the ﬁrst security. If the bid is hit, his terminal wealth is
WHit = [n1 + 1
n2]X −B1. Equating the certainty equivalents of being hit
and not being hit gives:
B1 = µ1 −ασ1
2 [(1 + 2n1) σ1 + 2ρn2σ2] ,
(11.3)
where ρ = Corr(X1, X2). Thus, the dealer will bid less aggressively if the
securities are positively correlated. This conforms to the usual intuition
that positive correlation aggravates total portfolio risk.
On the other hand, if we assume (as before) that the dealer is starting
at his optimum, then B1 = P1 −ασ2
1/2. Surprisingly, this is the same result
as in the one-security case. In particular, the correlation coefﬁcient drops
out. This is a consequence of offsetting effects. The optimal n1 and n2
in equation (11.3) depends negatively on ρ, leaving the bracketed term
invariant to changes in ρ. (Although this offset is a general feature of the
problem, the complete disappearance of ρ in the ﬁnal expression for the
bid is a consequence of CARA utility.)
11.3
Empirical Analysis of Dealer Inventories
11.3.1
A First Look at the Data
Changes in the dealer’s position reveal the dealer’s trades, which may
disclose strategy and proﬁtability. Position records for dealers (in fact, for
all traders) are therefore difﬁcult to obtain. There are no public data sets.
Most published research is based on data collected for regulatory purposes
and/or made available to the researcher under the condition of no further
redistribution.
NYSE specialist inventories are analyzed by Madhavan and Smidt
(1991, 1993), Hasbrouck and Soﬁanos (1993), and Madhavan and
Soﬁanos (1998). The graphs of typical daily closing positions reported
by Hasbrouck and Soﬁanos are a good place to start. Figure 11.3 depicts
the positions for stock A. The salient features are:
• Inventory are sometimes negative (short positions).
• There is no obvious drift or divergence.


112
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Figure 11.3.
Inventory for stock A.
• The mean inventory is near zero. Although not obvious from the
ﬁgure, overnight positions are small: Dealers tend to “go home
ﬂat.”
This inventory path is consistent with the economic logic presented to
this point. Other specialist inventories, however, are not as well behaved.
The specialist position for Hasbrouck and Soﬁanos’s stock C depicted in
ﬁgure 11.4 also appears to be mean-reverting but has protracted departures
(on the order of several months) from the mean. The variation in holdings
seems to be better characterized by long-term components, operating at
horizons normally associated with investment decisions. The specialist
may in fact be pursing short-term inventory control, but toward preferred
positions that are slowly time-varying. The graph demonstrates that even
traders who are ofﬁcially designated dealers are not necessarily well char-
acterized by the standard inventory perspective. (The plot for stock B, not
reproduced here, exhibits swings of even longer duration and size.)
The next section discusses statistical issues related to the univari-
ate characterization of inventory series and studies that incorporate
inventories into dynamic price/trade models.
11.3.2
Inventories and Trades:
Levels and Differences
If the dealer is counterparty to all trades and all trades are for one unit,
then the trade direction variable used earlier is qt = −It, where It is the


DEALERS AND THEIR INVENTORIES
113
Figure 11.4.
Inventory for stock C.
dealer’s inventory. (If we wanted to allow for various quantities, we’d just
use the signed order volume in lieu of qt.) If the qt values are uncorrelated,
as in the basic Roll model, then It will follow a random walk, diverging
over time (as noted by Garman). But suppose we start by assuming that
It is well behaved. In particular, if It is covariance stationary, what does
that imply about qt?
11.3.3
Stationarity
In the ﬁrst place, how do we decide whether a time series is a random walk
or covariance stationary? The question is actually ill-phrased. In the Roll
model, for example, the price is neither a random walk nor stationary. It’s
a mixture of both sorts of components. A somewhat better question is, how
do we know if a time series contains a random-walk component? From a
statistical viewpoint, however, even this is too vague. For reasons that will
shortly become clear, it’s more precise to ask, “Does the process contain a
unit root?” Formally, the material in this section applies to processes that
might have a unit root and are covariance stationary after ﬁrst differencing.
Statistical issues related to unit roots are discussed in Hamilton (1994,
pp. 475–543) and Fuller (1996, pp. 546–663).
The term unit root arises in connection with the autoregressive rep-
resentation for a time series. Consider the autoregressive form of a time
series xt in terms of the lag polynomial: φ(L)xt = εt where φ(L) = 1 + φ1L +
φ2L2 + · · · + φKLK. The stationarity of xt depends on the form of φ(L) and
in particular on the solutions to the polynomial equation φ(z) = 0.


114
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
The criterion for stationarity is that all of the solutions to φ(z) = 0 must
lie outside of the unit circle. Consider the simplest case, an autoregression
of order one. If xt = φ1xt−1 + εt, then φ(z) = 1 −φ1z = 0 implies z = φ−1
1 ,
and the requirement that |z| > 1 is equivalent to |φ1| < 1. Alternatively, if
we factor the polynomial as φ(z) = (1 −a1z)(1 −a2z) . . . (1 −aKz), the roots
correspond to the a−1
i
. If the ith root is equal to one, then a−1
i
= 0, and the
lag polynomial will be of the form φ(L) = (1 −L) . . .. In this case, we say
that “xt has a unit root.” If one root lies on the unit circle and the others
lie outside, then xt is stationary after ﬁrst differencing.
The Roll model also provides a nice illustration. The structural model
has the MA representation (1 −L)pt = θ(L)εt where θ(L) = 1 + θ1L. The
autoregressive representation for the price level is φ(L)pt = εt where
φ(L) = θ(L)−1(1 −L). We can identify at least one root here, and its value
is unity. This is not surprising because we built a random walk into the
structural model.
If we did not have a structural model, though, we’d have to make an
inference based on a sample of data. There are various statistical unit root
tests available. It is quite possible in microstructure situations, though, to
hypothesize situations in which the tests would be misleading. In the Roll
model, for example, a large trading cost coupled with a small random-walk
volatility can generate a sample in which the dominant feature is bid-ask
bounce and the sample path is apparently stationary.
11.3.4
Invertibility
The economic models unambiguously assert that the inventory series It
is mean-reverting. If it is also covariance stationary, then by the Wold
theorem it possesses a moving average representation: It = θ(L)εt. The
ﬁrst difference is stationary as well and possesses the MA representation
It = (1 −L)θ(L)εt.
When we encountered in the analysis of the Roll model a series (like
pt) that was (or contained) a random-walk component, we constructed a
stationary process by differencing. Suppose that we aren’t sure whether It
possesses a unit root or not. To be on the safe side, shouldn’t we take the
ﬁrst difference anyway? If the series is stationary to begin with, the ﬁrst
difference is still stationary, so by this criterion there is no harm done.
“Overdifferencing” does create one difﬁculty, however. It ruins the
recursion that underlies the autoregressive representation for the series.
To see this, consider the simple case where It = εt. The recursion then
becomes It = εt −εt−1 = εt −(It−1 + εt−2) = · · · = εt−It−1−It−2 −· · · ,
from which it is clear that the coefﬁcients on the lagged It never
converge. Few statistical software routines will alert the user to nonin-
vertibility. It is always possible to compute least squares estimates for
autoregressive models in ﬁnite samples. Often these estimated models


DEALERS AND THEIR INVENTORIES
115
will appear quite reasonable, with apparently well-behaved residuals,
and respectable goodness-of-ﬁt tests.
Sometimes, in lieu of dealer inventories, the data set identiﬁes dealer
trades: “100 shares purchased from the dealer, 200 shares sold by the
dealer, etc.” The trade series is (minus) the ﬁrst difference of the inventory
series. So if inventories are stationary, the trade series is noninvertible.
A noninvertible moving average model cannot be estimated by inverting
an estimated VAR. It can, however, be estimated directly by Kalman ﬁlter
maximum likelihood methods (Hamilton (1994, p. 387)).
11.4
The Dynamics of Prices, Trades, and
Inventories
It is obvious that dealers (at least those who survive) monitor their inven-
tories and keep them from diverging to arbitrarily large long or short
positions. No such clarity, however, characterizes our view of the control
mechanisms.
The mechanism described in section 11.1 is quote-based. Some early
empirical studies found evidence for this mechanism in that inventory
changes had a negative effect on quote changes. As predicted, when a cus-
tomer purchased from a dealer (depleting her inventory) the dealer bid and
ask would rise, presumably as the dealer sought to encourage an offsetting
sell order and discourage another incoming buy order. The problem is that
the same short-term relation is predicted by the asymmetric information
models. (Is the dealer raising the quotes on account of the possibility that
the purchaser is informed?) To differentiate the two effects empirically,
it is necessary to consider the long-run behavior. Information effects of
trades are permanent, while inventory effects are temporary (Hasbrouck
(1988)). That is, when offsetting trades restore the inventory to the desired
position, the inventory control component of the quotes should vanish.
Madhavan and Smidt (1991) describe a theoretical model of dealer behav-
ior that incorporates both inventory and asymmetric information effects
(also see Madhavan and Smidt (1993)).
For NYSE data, Hasbrouck and Soﬁanos (1993) estimate VARs that
include price changes, signed orders, and specialist inventory positions.
In a market where all trade is against the dealer, qt = −It, so an analysis
that includes current and lagged qt and It would suffer from multicol-
linearity (excessive dependence in the explanatory variables). The prob-
lem does not arise in the NYSE data because the specialist does not
participate in all trades. Hasbrouck and Soﬁanos ﬁnd that most of the
quote dynamics are attributable to trades, with inventories contributing
little explanatory power. Positions are not apparently managed by adjust-
ment of publicly quoted bids and offers.


116
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
This should not be too surprising. A dealer using public quotes would
be signaling to the world at large his desire to buy or sell, putting him at
a competitive disadvantage. Other liquidity suppliers face a similar sort
of dilemma. A customer bidding with a limit order runs the risk that his
bid will be matched by others in the market (quote matching) and that
his order will be executed after those other bids or (in the worst case) not
at all.
If inventory management is not effected with publicly posted bid and
offer quotes, though, how is it accomplished? There are a number of alter-
native mechanisms. They may be grouped in three categories: selective,
nonpublic quoting; interdealer markets; and market-speciﬁc rules that
allow dealers to participate in trades without public quoting.
The ﬁrst of these mechanisms typically arises from the practice (com-
mon in dealer markets) of making ﬁrm bids and offers only in response
to an inquiry by a customer and visible and accessible only by that cus-
tomer. Yao (1997) analyzes the U.S. dollar/Deutschmark deals of a major
foreign exchange dealer, and ﬁnds that the terms of trade are partially
determined by the inventory position of the dealer in the direction pre-
dicted by the inventory control hypothesis. The disadvantage of broad
public dissemination is avoided, but the mechanism relies on a sustained
ﬂow of customers. Dealers may also trade directly with each other in an
interdealer market (described in section 2.3.1).
In consideration of their market-making obligations, designated deal-
ers on regulated exchanges often have methods of trading that are not
available (or as readily available) to other participants. These typically
involve discretion concerning participation in a trade. Madhavan and
Soﬁanos (1998) document that NYSE specialist inventory positions are
partial determinants of specialist participation. For example, a specialist
with a neutral inventory position would be inclined to let an incoming
customer buy order transact against sell orders in the limit order book.
With an undesired long position he might sell to the incoming customer
himself. (To do this, he would have to sell at a price below that of any
public limit sell order.) This last-mover advantage is further explored in
section 13.5.
11.5
Concluding Remarks
Garman’s view of dealers as smoothers of buy/sell order imbalances
continues to be useful. His model focuses on asynchronous arrivals of
individual traders, but the perspective also applies when temporary
order imbalances arise in the aggregate. Dealers are agents who (for a
price) accommodate these imbalances (see Grossman and Miller (1987);
Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993); Saar (1998); Llorente et al. (2002).
At the same time, the lines between dealers and customers in many


DEALERS AND THEIR INVENTORIES
117
markets have blurred. Professional intermediaries are no longer invariably
seen as necessary to any well-functioning market. The effects modeled in
these studies certainly remain pertinent, but the dealers are best consid-
ered as a broad set, not limited to those agents ofﬁcially designated as
such.
The notion that dealers are characterized by inventory control seems
less relevant in today’s markets. Nor does the logic of achieving inventory
control by positioning of the posted quotes seem as compelling as it once
did. On the other hand, if inventory control is more broadly interpreted as
position management, the issues are as pertinent as ever. The underlying
concerns of risk and credit exposure, formerly viewed as important mostly
(or solely) for dealers, are in fact pertinent for a large number of agents that
may, in the course of their trading decisions, act as liquidity suppliers.
Finally, although trade has become disintermediated in many markets
(such as actively traded equities), dealers remain important in many other
markets (bonds, foreign exchange, swaps, etc.). The role they play and how
they should be regulated are ongoing concerns of practical interest.


12
12
Limit Order Markets
The worldwide proliferation of limit order markets (LOMs) clearly estab-
lishes a need for economic and statistical models of these mechanisms.
This chapter discusses some approaches, but it should be admitted at the
outset that no comprehensive and realistic models (either statistical or
economic) exist.
One might start with the view that a limit order, being a bid or offer,
is simply a dealer quote by another name. The implication is that a limit
order is exposed to asymmetric information risk and also must recover
noninformational costs of trade. This view supports the application of
the economic and statistical models described earlier to LOM, hybrid,
and other nondealer markets.
This perspective features a sharp division between liquidity suppliers
and demanders. This dichotomy is a useful modeling simpliﬁcation, and
it will be used again in later chapters. The essence of a LOM, however, is
that these roles are blurred. Agents dynamically decide whether to supply
liquidity with limit orders or consume it with market orders. Their deci-
sions may depend quite generally on the state of the market. Liquidity, it
is sometimes said, is supplied by the customers.
Accordingly, this chapter concentrates mostly on models that promi-
nently feature order choice. It is easy to see why this might alter our view of
the quotes. In most of the models considered earlier, dealer optimization
and competition lead to a zero expected proﬁt condition: The dealer can’t,
on average, lose money on trades. To a customer intent on accomplishing
a trade, however, a limit order might simply be an alternative superior to
a market order. The customer’s bid need not satisfy a zero expected proﬁt
condition. It might lose money and still be preferable to a market order.
118


LIMIT ORDER MARKETS
119
The ﬁrst section considers a simple one-period model of order choice.
(A dynamic multiperiod model is described in a later chapter.)
It will become apparent from this analysis that a key determinant
of order choice is the probability that a particular limit order will be
executed. The model initially considered here features an exogenous exe-
cution mechanism: The probability that a limit order is executed depends
on its price and nothing more. This greatly simpliﬁes the individual’s deci-
sion problem. In reality, of course, execution probabilities are determined
by the order choice decisions of other agents. The ask price is some else’s
sell limit order; the latent reservation values may trigger market orders.
There is, therefore, a strong dependence between an agent’s own order
choice problem and the order choices made by others in the past and in
the future. Ideally, the solution to the order choice problem should be
consistent with the assumed price and execution processes. That is, the
latter should arise when a set of other traders follows the strategy given by
the former. This consistency is necessary for the market to be in dynamic
equilibrium.
The close dependence between execution probability and order choice
motivates the value of equilibrium analysis. The chapter considers two
equilibrium models, due to Parlour (1998) and Foucault (1999), and some
of the empirical analyses these models have motivated. The ﬁnal section
summarizes other models, and current directions.
12.1
The Choice between a Limit and Market Order
Most of our models of dealer quoting are characterized by indifference
to execution. The zero expected proﬁt condition underlying the Roll and
asymmetric information models is conditional on a trade, in which event
the dealer simply recovers his costs. The exceptions are the inventory
control models where the dealer generally prefers to trade in one direction
or the other. In this section we investigate a customer’s order choice when
there is a preference for trade. The conceptual framework is based on
Cohen, Maier, Schwartz, and Whitcomb (1981) (CMSW). Related papers
include Angel (1994) and Harris (1998).
We can set up a simple order choice situation by building on the model
considered in section 11.2. In one version of that model, a dealer already at
his portfolio optimum set his bid to include compensation for being pulled
away from that optimum. The bid is deﬁned by the condition that the
expected utility is the same whether or not a customer actually executes
against the bid. The present model uses the same approach to describe a
customer who enters the market with a portfolio imbalance and can enter
a market order, place a limit order, or do nothing.
The model is set in the CARA-normal framework. As in section 11.2
an agent (the customer) has exponential utility U(W) = −e−αW. If wealth is


120
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
normally distributed, W ∼N(µW , σ2
W ), then EU(W) = −e−αµW + α2σ2
W /2.
There is a single security with payoff X ∼N(µx, σ2
X), and borrowing or
lending is at a zero rate of interest. If the customer currently holds n shares,
her expected utility is EUBase ≡EU(W) where µW = nµX and σ2
W = n2σ2
X.
If she places a limit order to buy at price L and the limit order is hit (exe-
cuted), then her expected utility is EUHit(L) ≡EU(W), computed using
µW = (n + 1)µX −L and σ2
W = (n + 1)2σ2
X. The expected utility of the limit
order strategy is then EULimit(L) = PrHit(L)EUHit(L) + [1 −PrHit(L)]EUBase
where PrHit(L) is the probability of execution.
The limit order’s execution probability is an important and difﬁcult-
to-model aspect of the problem. If the order is displayed (and in a
modern electronic market, it usually will be), it changes the information
and strategic incentives of other market participants. Execution prob-
ability is therefore properly modeled as an equilibrium phenomenon.
Although some equilibrium models will be discussed in subsequent
sections, these analyses are stylized and do not claim to achieve full and
realistic characterizations of execution probabilities.
What are the underlying determinants of execution uncertainty? One
way to look at things is to suppose that potential sellers arrive randomly
over time, for example, as in the Poisson process assumed by Easley et al.
(2002). There is then some chance that in any ﬁnite interval, no sellers
will arrive.
Alternatively (or additionally), there may be uncertainty about the
reservation prices of potential sellers. The dynamics of double auction
start-ups often involve a progressive narrowing of the spread as buyers
and sellers compete to outbid and outoffer each other. It is natural to sup-
pose that the agents with the strongest demands for trade take the lead
in this process. Yet one strategy involves letting others narrow the spread
and hitting the bid or offer when this convergence is judged to be substan-
tially complete. A newly arriving agent’s visible limit order may trigger
such an action.1
Suppose that the ith potential seller in the market is characterized by an
unexpressed reservation price denoted ci. The seller monitors the market,
and if she sees a buy limit order priced at ci or higher, she immediately
enters a market order to sell. Let C denote the minimum unexpressed
reservation price across all sellers in the market. A limit buy order priced
at L will execute if C ≤L. Suppose that C is exponentially distributed with
density f (C) = λ exp[−λ(C −θ)]. In this context the exponential parameter
λ may be interpreted as a measure of seller aggressiveness. The lower
bound of the distribution is θ (no seller reservation prices are below θ). The
execution probability is simply the distribution function corresponding
to this density, PrHit(L) = 1 −exp[−λ(L −θ)] for L ≥0.
With the exponential execution probability, the expected utility of
a limit order strategy may be computed. For purposes of illustra-
tion, we’ll assume parameter values α = 1, µX = 1, σ2
X = 1, λ = 1, and θ = 0.


LIMIT ORDER MARKETS
121
Figure 12.1.
Limit order placement strategies.
Figure 12.1 depicts expected utility as a function of buy limit price for
initial holdings n = 0, −1, and −2. The concavity reﬂects the trade-off
between paying a low price with an unaggressive limit order that rarely
executes and paying a high price with an aggressive limit that is highly
likely to execute.
A customer who is short one unit (n = −1) can be viewed as an agent
with a hedging demand. With the given numerical parameter values, her
optimal limit order is priced at L = 0.75 (and has a 53% probability of
execution). This is obviously preferable to submitting no order.
Now suppose that the current ask quote in the market is A, repre-
senting a dealer or a limit order seller. With a market buy order, the
customer can purchase with certainty, paying A, and achieving expected
utility EUMarket(A) ≡EU(W), computed using µW = (n + 1)µX −A and
σ2
W = (n + 1)2σ2
X. A market order can be preferable to doing noth-
ing. The customer is indifferent between these two strategies when
EUMarket(A) = EUBase. With n = −1 and the other assumed values, A = 1.5.
If A < 1.5, the customer will strictly prefer a market buy order to doing
nothing.
We now turn to a comparison of market and limit order strategies.
A limit order priced at L = 0.75 is obviously preferable to a market order
when A = 1.5, because the expected utility of the latter strategy is identical
to that of doing nothing. Suppose now that A moves downward from 1.5.
At what point will the customer switch from a limit to a market order?
The value of A such that EULimit(L = 0.75) = EUMarket(A) is A = 1.17.
It is noteworthy that the switch point is well above the optimal limit
price. CMSW compare this to gravitational pull. (When the market ask


122
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
price, approaching from above, hits 1.17, the limit order buyer is pulled
to the ask—switches to a market buy order.) CMSW show that the prin-
cipal necessary condition for gravitational pull is that limL →A PrHit(L) is
bounded away from unity, that is, that there is a discontinuity in the exe-
cution probability at the ask price. Even as L approaches A in the limit,
some execution uncertainty remains. They suggest that the gravitational
pull effect can explain the existence of a ﬁnite bid ask spread, even when
prices are continuous.
12.2
Equilibrium
The order choice model relies on an exogenous (and ad hoc) execution
mechanism. In reality, execution probabilities are fundamentally endoge-
nous. An agent’s own choice depends on the execution probability, which
in turn depends on her conjectures about the choices faced by other agents
who arrive after her. This linkage will tend to mitigate the direct effect of
a change in the market environment. Something that makes an immediate
market order more expensive (e.g., an access fee) will make a limit order
more attractive. But customers arriving later will also prefer limit orders,
driving down the execution probability, thereby making an immediate
limit order less attractive. The outcome of these opposing forces is best
characterized by an analysis of the equilibrium (as noted, for example, by
CMSW).
Equilibrium analyses of limit order markets have been suggested
by Kumar and Seppi (1994), Chakravarty and Holden (1995), Parlour
(1998), Foucault (1999), Foucault, Kadan, and Kandel (2001), and Goettler,
Parlour, and Rajan (2005). The following sections describe two represen-
tative models.
12.2.1
The Parlour (1998) Equilibrium Model
In the Parlour model, executions arise from market orders submitted by
other traders facing their own order choice problems. The model abstracts
from many familiar features of a security market. There is no uncertainty
about the asset’s cash ﬂows, nor is there price determination (at least in
the usual sense). Despite these limitations, however, it elegantly illustrates
the key equilibrium interaction that connects an agent’s order choice and
her beliefs about similar choices made by others in the future.
There is one security. It is traded in day 1 and pays off a certain
amount V on day 2. On day 1, at each of the times t = 1, . . . , T, a ran-
domly drawn customer (agent t) arrives at the market. Agents are ﬁrst
characterized as potential buyers or sellers. With probability one-half, the
arriving agent is a potential buyer: She has an endowment of cash that
she can use to purchase one share. Otherwise the agent is a potential


LIMIT ORDER MARKETS
123
seller: She holds one share, which can be sold for cash. Agent t’s prefer-
ences are given by a utility function U(C1, C2) = C1 + βtC2, where βt is a
time preference parameter. Across agents, the βt are randomly distributed
over an interval (β, ¯β). The form of the distribution, and in particular the
likelihood of outcomes near the endpoints, will affect agents’ eagerness
to trade. Several alternative distributions will be considered. A potential
seller with a low value of βt will be eager to sell; a potential buyer with a
low βt will be disinclined to purchase. Despite strong preference for cur-
rent consumption, he cannot sell short. Nor can a potential seller with a
high βt buy on margin. An agent, on arriving at the market, may decide to
submit no orders and keep his existing positions.
We now turn to the details of the trading mechanism. The bid and ask
prices B and A are ﬁxed, with B < V < A. The limit order book is described
by the number of shares on the bid and ask sides, nB
t and nA
t , immediately
prior to the arrival of agent t. If agent t enters a limit buy order, then
nB
t + 1 = nB
t + 1 (and similarly for limit sell orders). If nA
t ≥1 and agent t
enters a buy market order, then nA
t + 1 = nA
t −1, that is, the order executes
against the book. Limit orders in the book are executed in ﬁrst-in, ﬁrst-
out time priority. If agent t enters a buy market order when the book is
empty, the order will execute (at price A) against a dealer. Dealers stand
ready to buy any amount at B or sell any amount at A. They must yield to
customers, in that any customer limit order must be ﬁlled before a dealer
can buy or sell. Dealers do not behave strategically or actively.
Agent’s beliefs and optimal strategies are determined by recursively
working backward from time T. This recursion can be described as fol-
lows. For agent T, a limit order is pointless, because there are no remaining
opportunities for a market order to arrive. If she is a potential seller, she
will compare the utility of doing nothing (βTV) with the utility of selling
at the bid (B). If βTV < B ⇔bT < B/V, then she’ll enter a market sell order.
Given a particular distribution for βT, we can compute the probability
that agent T will enter a market sell order. A similar computation gives
the probability of a market buy order.
Now consider agent T −1. If he’s a buyer and nB
T−1 = 0, he can enter
a buy limit order. This will be executed if agent T enters a market sell
order, the probability of which we just computed. If nB
T−1 ≥1, agent
T −1’s limit buy will not be ﬁrst in the execution queue, and therefore
cannot be executed in the one remaining period. Given agent T −1’s direc-
tion (potential buyer or seller), nB
T−1, nA
T−1, and the limit order execution
probabilities, his optimal strategy depends on βT−1. Parlour demonstrates
that there are cutoffs βBuy
Limit and β
Buy
Limit (functions of time, the state of the
book, and the execution probabilities) such that if βT−1 < βBuy
Limit, agent
T −1 does nothing; if βBuy
Limit < βT−1 < β
Buy
Limit, he enters a limit buy order;
and if β
Buy
Limit < βT−1, a market buy order. Given the distribution of βT−1
we can compute the probabilities of these events. These deﬁne the limit


124
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Figure 12.2.
Depth of the book over time.
order execution probabilities for time T −2 limit orders, which deﬁne
agent T −2’s optimal strategies, and so on.
For many of the models discussed in this book, exposition is simpliﬁed
by focusing exclusively on one side of the market (e.g., buy market orders
hitting the ask side of the book). It is noteworthy that we can’t do this for
the Parlour model, for example, by restricting the backward recursions to
computations involving limit sell execution probabilities. The reason is
that a limit sell order can only be executed by market buy orders occurring
in the future. The relative attractiveness of these buy market orders will
depend on the execution probabilities of limit buy orders. Thus, execution
probabilities for buy and sell limit orders are jointly determined over time.
The equilibrium features can be illustrated by numerical example. We
set V = 5.5, B = 5, and A = 6. Initially, we assume that the βt are uniformly
distributed over the interval (0, 2). Figure 12.2 depicts the expected depth
of the limit order book over time for trading days of T = 3, 5, 7, and 9
periods. Starting from an empty book at t = 1, the depth increases as the
book tends to ﬁll. The books ﬁll more rapidly for the markets with larger
Ts: with longer trading days, a limit order is more attractive because there
are more opportunities for it to be executed. Near the end of the trading
day, however, the depth drops.
Next, consider the model with T = 5. Figure 12.3 depicts the proba-
bilities of various events at each trading opportunity. Limit order usage
declines over time, while market order usage increases.
Next we consider alternative hypotheses about the agents’ preferences.
Figure 12.4 depicts three candidate distributions for the βt. Panel A is
the uniform distribution used in the previous examples. The distribu-
tion in panel B is triangular. It is concentrated around unity, and exhibits
a relatively low likelihood of extreme realizations (few eager traders).


LIMIT ORDER MARKETS
125
Figure 12.3.
Event probabilities.
Panel C depicts an inverted triangular distribution in which the proba-
bilities are elevated at the ends (many eager traders).
Intuition suggests that the expected depths of the book across the dis-
tributions should be inversely related to the likelihood of extreme values.
(More eager traders imply more market orders and fewer limit orders.)
This is indeed the case. For a market with a total of T = 7 trading
Figure 12.4.
Distribution of betas.


126
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
periods, expected depth prior to the third arriving agent is E

nA
T=3

is
0.19 when the βt are inverted triangular, 0.27 for the uniform, and 0.37
for the triangular distributions.
What may initially seem less intuitive is the behavior of the strat-
egy cutoff points. Figure 12.4 also depicts for each distribution the β
regions where a potential seller who arrives at time t = 3 and encounters
an empty book will use a market order, use a limit order, or do nothing. For
the uniform distribution, the cutoff between a market and limit order is
βLimit
Sell = 0.64. A potential seller with β3 = 0.65 would prefer a limit order.
The corresponding cutoff for the triangular distribution is βLimit
Sell = 0.70,
implying that a seller with β3 = 0.65 would prefer a market order. That
is, holding β3 ﬁxed, switching from a uniform to triangular distributions
shifts the agent from a limit to a market order. Yet we have argued that the
triangular distribution implies less urgency and therefore fewer market
orders in equilibrium.
The resolution of this apparent inconsistency lies in the fact that agent
3’s decisions are driven by the expected future actions of others. With
the triangular distribution, extreme realizations for β4, β5, β6, and β7 are
less likely. It is less probable that a limit order entered by agent 3 will be
executed, so for this agent a market order becomes more desirable. The
value of equilibrium models lies in their ability to illuminate interactions
of this sort.
The Parlour model has a number of empirical implications for the
dynamics of prices and orders. The predictions most commonly invoked
in empirical modeling, however, concern the relation between limit order
usage and the state of the book. These may be stated as follows:
i. An increase in book depth on the bid side decreases the proba-
bility that a buyer will submit a limit order.
ii. An increase in book depth on the offer side increases the
probability that a buyer will submit a limit order.
Predictions for sell limit orders are symmetric. Prediction (i) is a conse-
quence of limit order queuing: An order added to a book when there is
already large depth has more orders standing in front of it, and a lower
probability of execution. This same logic will be used by future sellers
conditioning on the offer side of the book. High offer-side depth decreases
the attractiveness of limit orders for them, making it more likely that they
will use a market sell order. This gives prediction (ii).
12.2.2
The Foucault (1999) Equilibrium Model
The Foucault model also exhibits a dynamic consistency that links exe-
cution probabilities with order choice. Whereas the implications of the


LIMIT ORDER MARKETS
127
Parlour model primarily involve dynamic order choice, Foucault’s results
are cross-sectional. As in the Parlour model, at each time t = 1, . . . , T an
agent arrives in the market. Here, though, T is a random stopping time:
At each t, the probability that trading will terminate is (1 −ρ). If trading
terminates, the security pays off VT = v0 + T
t=1 εt where the εt are inde-
pendently distributed value innovations, εt = ±σ, with each realization
having a probability of one-half.
At each time t (assuming that the game is not over), a trader arrives. The
trader is characterized by the reservation price, Rt = vt + yt, where yt = ±L,
with each realization having a probability of one-half. Yt is independent
of vt at all leads and lags, and hence is not informative about the value.
Instead, it arises from portfolio or liquidity considerations that are not
explicitly modeled. Yt drives the direction of the agent’s desired trade
(buy or sell).
If a trade is executed at price P, a buyer will have utility U(yt) =
VT + yt −P. A seller will have utility U(yt) = P −(VT + yt). The state of
the book at the arrival of agent t is st = {At, Bt}, the best ask and bid in the
book. If there is nothing on the bid side, Bt = −∞; if there is nothing on
the ask side, At = +∞. Agent t knows st, vt, and yt and can take one of
the following actions. If the book is not empty, he can hit either the bid
or the ask with a market order. Alternatively, he can place both a limit
buy and a limit sell order. If the book is empty, this latter strategy is the
only one available (apart from the suboptimal strategy of doing nothing).
A trader gets one shot at the market. He doesn’t have the opportunity
to return and revise the order. Furthermore, limit orders are valid only for
one period. This implies that the book is either empty or full. The prob-
ability of execution for a limit order depends on the limit price in the
usual way. Here, though, the execution probability is not an ad hoc func-
tional form but instead arises endogenously. Speciﬁcally, agent t knows
the distribution of vt+1, and the distribution of the characteristics for the
agent t + 1. This enables him to derive the execution probability for any
given limit price.
Despite the simplicity of the model, the strategic considerations regard-
ing order choice are quite rich. First consider execution risk of a limit
order when there is no possibility of change in the underlying asset value
(σ = 0). Part of the execution risk arises from the random characteristics of
the next trader. If yt = +L (a natural buyer) and yt+1 = +L as well, a trade is
unlikely. So a limit order can fail to execute because the two parties wish
to trade in the same direction. A limit order submitted at time t might also
fail to execute, however, because t + 1 = T, that is, the market closes.
If we now allow for nonzero value innovations (σ > 0), a buy limit order
submitted at time t (for example) also faces the risk that εt+1 = −σ. This
corresponds to the real-world situation of a limit order that can’t be can-
celed promptly in response to a public news announcement. This is a form
of the winner’s curse. It increases the chance that an agent’s limit order


128
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
will execute but decreases the agent’s gain from the trade (and perhaps
drives it negative). The limit order is said to be picked off subsequent to
a public information event.
A move in the other direction (εt+1 = +σ) decreases the chance of exe-
cution (but increases the agent’s gains from an execution). This situation
occurs in actual trading situations when the market “moves away” from
a limit order, often leaving the trader (a) wishing he’d originally used a
market order, and (b) chasing the market with more aggressively priced
limit or market orders. (This strategy is considered in chapter 15 but is
not available to agents in the Foucault model.)
The predictions of the model are sensible. As in the analyses of indi-
vidual order choice, when the opposite side quote is distant, a trader is
more likely to use a limit order. The fundamental risk of a security, σ, is
a key variable. If σ increases (higher fundamental risk) then a given limit
order faces a higher pick-off risk. This causes limit order traders to fade
their prices (make them less aggressive) and the spread widens. Market
orders become more expensive, leading traders to favor limit orders. The
order mix shifts in favor of limit orders, but fewer of them execute. This
is a comparative statics result and thus best viewed as a cross-sectional
prediction (across ﬁrms) rather than dynamic one (what happens when
the volatility changes over time).
12.3
Empirical Event Models
Initial studies of limit order markets focused on the Tokyo Stock Exchange
(Lehmann and Modest (1994) and Hamao and Hasbrouck (1995)) and the
Paris Bourse (Biais, Hillion and Spatt (1995)). The latter noted that for
many purposes the evolution of a market can be described by a sequence of
well-deﬁned events. A minimal set of events for a LOM, for example, con-
sists of order submissions (buy or sell, market or limit) and cancellations.
We might reﬁne this classiﬁcation by treating limit orders at different
prices as different events and similarly for cancellations. The content
of the equilibrium models lies in their predictions about the relative
probabilities of these events.
A natural statistical framework for modeling the event occurrences is
the multinomial logit model. (Greene (2002) provides an excellent discus-
sion.) Let the possible events (outcomes) be indexed by j = 0, . . . N, and let
Yt denote the outcome at time t. Outcome probabilities are then given by
the system of equations:
Pr(Yt = i)
Pr(Yt = 0) = exp [αi + Ztβi]
for i = 1, . . . , N.
(12.1)
Zt is a vector of conditioning variables (which must be known prior to
outcome determination). The model parameters are the intercepts αi and


LIMIT ORDER MARKETS
129
the coefﬁcients βi. Note that although there are N + 1 outcomes, there
are only N equations. This is a consequence of the requirement that the
probabilities sum to one. Outcome zero is the reference event. The condi-
tioning information Zt will presumably include summary statistics on the
depth in the book, recent volume and volatility, and (in a cross-sectional
application) security-speciﬁc information, such as return variance, market
capitalization, and so on. One can push the deﬁnition of predetermined
to include order size. Even though this is not public information prior to
the outcome determination, it is presumably known to the agent making
the decision.
In modeling discrete choices, it is sometimes possible to order the
outcomes. For example, observations of daily weather that are coded as
cold, mild, and hot are logically modeled as ordered transformations of
an underlying continuous variable (the temperature) that is unobserved
(at least within the context of the model). If a car buyer’s color preferences
are observed to be red, blue, or green, however, there is no obvious natural
ordering.
Ordered outcomes often result in a more parsimonious model. An
ordered multinomial logit model, for example, has the form:
logit(Pr(Yt ≤i)) = αi + Ztβ
for i = 0, . . . , N,
(12.2)
where the logit transformation is logit(x) = x/(1- x). One key difference
between equations (12.1) and (12.2) is that the β coefﬁcients in the ordered
logit model are common to all outcomes. This may simplify estimation,
presentation, and interpretation of the results, particularly if Zt is large.
Does the set of limit order market events have a natural ordering?
Within a single direction (buy or sell), limit orders are clearly ordered
by price. Market orders can be placed on the same ordering by imputing
to them a limit price equal to the bid or offer which they hit. (Many systems
in fact require all orders to be priced.) The Parlour model suggests such
an ordering, with βt as the latent continuous variable. It may also seem
natural to place buys and sells in the same ordering, implicitly viewing
sales as resulting from negative demand. However, this is not generally
compatible with the Parlour model, as the β ranges associated with opti-
mal strategies overlap for buyers and sellers. It is also difﬁcult to place
cancellations on this scale.
Representative analyses using unordered logit speciﬁcations include
Smith (2000), Ellul et al. (2002) Hasbrouck and Saar (2003); Grifﬁths et al.
(2000) and Renaldo (2004) employ ordered speciﬁcations. The studies
differ in their particulars and often in their conclusions. In describing
dynamic variation in order choice, the most consistent ﬁnding concerns
the bid-ask spread: When the spread is wide, order choice tilts in favor
of a limit order. The Parlour prediction that same-side depth favors a
market order is supported by Renaldo, Ellul et al., and Hasbrouck and Saar.


130
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Support for the hypothesis that an increase in opposite-side depth favors
limit orders, however, is less clear. The effects of volatility in the cross-
section (across ﬁrms) are also mixed (Hasbrouck and Saar (2003), Smith
(2000)).
The sequential event analyses discussed herein are motivated the eco-
nomic analyses considered earlier in the chapter and are best viewed as
attempts to test these analyses and guide their reﬁnement. LOMs are suf-
ﬁciently complex, however, that a case can be made in some situations
for atheoretic statistical modeling (Farmer, Patelli, and Zovko (2005)).


13
13
Depth
In addition to best bid and offers, most modern ﬁnancial markets present
their customers with full price/quantity schedules, essentially supply
and demand curves for instantaneous trade. This chapter explores the
determinants of these schedules and what might be learned from their
analysis.
The stylized empirical fact is that the supply and demand schedules
appear to be too steep. As an illustration, recall that in the basic sequen-
tial trade model, the price at which an order is executed is equal to the
expectation of the security value (conditional on the trade). Because trade
prices are equal to expectations, trade price changes mirror the revisions
in expectations. In a sequence of three buy orders, for example, the price
at which the last order is executed is the expected security value con-
ditional on all three orders. Now suppose that in a limit order market,
the purchases are combined into one order for three units. The order exe-
cutes against the ask side of the book, at progressively higher prices as
quantities at lower prices were exhausted. It would seem reasonable to
suppose that the price at which the last part of the order is executed will
be the new expected security value, around which the book would reform
shortly after the trade.
Sandas (2001) examines a sample of OMX data. Figure 13.1 (ﬁgure 1
in the original) depicts three summary price schedules for two stocks.
The steepest lines (dashed) in each graph are the mean book price sched-
ules. The quantities on the horizontal axis are signed as the demand of
the incoming market order (a negative demand is a sale that executes
against the bid side of the book). The next steepest lines (dash/dotted)
are the median book price schedules. The differences between mean and
131


132
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Figure 13.1.
Estimated limit order book and price revision
schedules for two representative OMX stocks.
median are suggestive of outliers, times when depth is extraordinarily low.
The shallowest lines (solid with dotted conﬁdence intervals) are the price
revisions estimated from dynamic regression speciﬁcations similar to
those discussed in chapter 8.
The differences between the price schedules in the book and the price
revision functions are striking. They suggest that following a large order
(one that walks deeply through the book), depth reappears at prices that
are better than the marginal execution price of the order (sometimes
called backﬁlling). The ﬁnding also suggests that agents with large quan-
tities to buy or sell could trade more cheaply on average by splitting
the orders into smaller quantities and sending them to the market over
time.
This chapter discusses the connections between the price schedules
posted by liquidity suppliers and the information possessed by liquidity
demanders. The foundation of the chapter is a family of models orig-
inally presented by Glosten (1989, 1994). The analysis considers three
canonical types of liquidity suppliers and the market environments: com-
petitive dealer, limit order, and monopolistic dealer markets. We then
turn to the liquidity demanders (customers), modeling their informational
and noninformational motives for trade, and considering equilibrium in


DEPTH
133
each of the three market settings. The equilibrium price schedules embody
consistent beliefs and optimizing behavior across liquidity suppliers and
their customers. The chapter then returns to the empirical evidence, and
extensions.
13.1
Market Structures and Liquidity Suppliers
Glosten’s market structures are representative of settings commonly
encountered in securities trading.
13.1.1
The Competitive Dealer Market
The liquidity suppliers in this market are dealers. Each dealer quotes a
price schedule that speciﬁes a unit price for the entire amount the cus-
tomer wishes to trade. A customer discloses the full size of his trade.
This rules out the possibility of order splitting. A customer with 100,000
shares to buy, for example, cannot approach two dealers and buy 50,000
shares from each at the price corresponding to a full order size of
50,000 shares (which is what each dealer sees). The customer can in prin-
ciple buy 50,000 shares with each dealer, as long as each dealer knows
that the full amount is 100,000 shares. The customer gains nothing from
this, however, as each dealer sets the unit price based on the full amount.
In this situation the customer has an obvious incentive to lie. Nor-
mally, he would be tempted to disclose an amount smaller than the true
quantity, although if he wished to momentarily establish a ﬁctive price he
might exaggerate the total quantity. Though there is no foolproof way for
the dealer to detect such cheating, unusual volume or price movements
may be suggestive. Dealers may punish suspected infractions by subse-
quently offering poor terms of trade or completely refusing to deal with
the customer.
The dealer’s pricing criterion is the one familiar from the sequential
and strategic trading models: The price must be equal to the expected
value of the security conditional on the trade. If the price is higher than
this expectation, competitors will ﬁnd it proﬁtable to offer more aggressive
terms; if the price is lower, the dealer will lose money. Equilibrium is not
inevitable. If the informational advantage of the customers is sufﬁciently
high, no feasible pricing schedule may exist, and the market fails.
13.1.2
The Limit Order Book
The price schedule in a limit order book is the aggregation of unexecuted
orders, typically small orders submitted by numerous and diverse traders.
For pricing, however, the distinctive feature of the book is that the agent
who places a limit order does not know the total size of the incoming order


134
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
that will cause his own order to execute. Unlike the dealer in the last sec-
tion, the limit order trader does not get the opportunity to set the terms of
order based on knowledge of the total incoming order. A large marketable
order will “walk through the book,” with the ﬁrst portion executing at the
most favorable price and subsequent portions on less favorable terms. For
this reason, executions against the book are discriminating, in the same
sense that a discriminating monopolist picks customers off the demand
curve based on their willingness to pay.
Discrimination changes the incentives to provide liquidity. To see this,
suppose that the best ask in the market is $20.10, and that the total quantity
offered at this and higher prices is 100,000 shares. A trader is contemplat-
ing a limit sell order for 100 shares at $20. In the standard sequential trade
model, his offer price of $20 would be the expectation of the security value,
conditional on an incoming customer order to purchase 100 shares. But
in the book his order will also be executed (at $20) if the incoming order
is a purchase of 100,100 shares. This larger quantity obviously conveys a
stronger positive signal about the security value. There is ample opportu-
nity for ex post regret, because the trader might sell at $20 while (nearly
simultaneously) sellers deeper in the book are selling at higher prices.
The limit order seller cannot prevent this from happening, but he can set
his price to reﬂect the possibility. In a discriminating book, therefore, a
limit order is priced at the “tail expectation,” that is, the expected value
of the security conditional on an incoming order of a size just sufﬁcient
to trigger execution or anything larger.
13.1.3
A Monopolistic Dealer
Most security markets are well approximated by the competitive dealer or
limit order paradigms just described. But in a market for a thinly traded
security or one in which there are regulatory or institutional barriers to
entry, a dealer may possess market power. In the third setting we consider
a monopolistic dealer.
One feature of this situation is the standard result. The monopolist
enjoys rents, abnormal proﬁts that are not competed away. A more sur-
prising result is that a monopolistic market may beneﬁt customers (relative
to the competitive dealer market). In a competitive dealer market (or in
the limit order market, for that matter) each point on the price sched-
ule is a competitive equilibrium, in the sense that it is open to entry
by new liquidity suppliers. If one point in the price schedule is prof-
itable, a new entrant can supply liquidity at that point only. This rules
out price schedules dependent on cross-subsidization, for example, with
proﬁts on numerous small trades subsidizing losses on infrequent large
trades. A monopolistic dealer, however, is not so restricted. He seeks
to maximize expected proﬁts over the entire price schedule. Proﬁtable
points on his price schedule are not contested and so may offset losses


DEPTH
135
at other points. Cross-subsidization may enable the market to stay open
when a competitive dealer market might fail.
13.2
The Customers
To most effectively compare and contrast the three market regimes, we
will analyze them holding constant the remaining features of the economy.
This characterization is stylized, in keeping with the demands of model
tractability. The notation is similar to Glosten’s.
The model is set in the CARA-normal framework described in section
11.2. There is one risky security with random payoff X ∼N(µX, σ2
X). An
incoming customer initially has n units of the security and may purchase
q additional units. The initial endowment may be negative, reﬂecting a
previously established short position or a hedging demand not explicitly
modeled. Likewise, a negative q corresponds to a sale of the security.
The customer has no initial endowment of cash. To ﬁnance purchases,
he may borrow at zero interest. Proceeds of sales are invested at zero
interest.
A purchase of q requires an expenditure of R(q), which is interpreted
as the total revenue received by the liquidity supplier(s). In the dealer
models, the customer trades the entire quantity at a single quoted price,
and R(q) = P(q) × q where P(q) is the dealers’ pricing schedule. In the limit
order market, though, R(q) arises from walking through a continuum of
prices. Subsequent to trading, the risky payoff is known. At this point the
customer’s terminal wealth is W = (n + q)X −R(q). The customer chooses
q to maximize an expected utility function of the form EU(W) = E[−e−ρW ].
The ﬁrst-order condition for maximization of the certainty equivalent is
µX −(q + n)ρσ2
X −R′(q) = 0.
(13.1)
Prior to trade the customer receives a signal (noisy indication) of
the security value S = X + ε where ε ∼N(0, σ2
ε ) independent of n. Using
the bivariate normal projection results introduced in section 7.1, condi-
tional on S, X ∼N(µX|S, σ2
X|S) where µX|S = (σ2
ε µX + σ2
XS)/(σ2
ε + σ2
X), and
σ2
X|S = σ2
ε σ2
X/(σ2
ε + σ2
X).
We now turn our attention to what the liquidity suppliers can infer
given the customer’s trade. If the liquidity suppliers knew n, then given q
(and, of course, their revenue function) they could deduce the customer’s
signal. Both parties would then have the same information, and there
would be no informational motive for trade. A richer and more real-
istic interaction results when the liquidity suppliers do not know the
endowment n. More precisely, we assume that across the population of
potential customers, endowments are normally distrubted, n ∼N(0, σ2
n),


136
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
independent of X and ε. The customer’s trade now arises, in the liquid-
ity suppliers’ view, from a mix of informational and noninformational
motives.
The customer’s ﬁrst-order condition plays a crucial role in the liquidity
suppliers’ inference. Noting that ρ > 0, equation 13.1 may be rearranged as
M + qρσ2
X|S = µX|S −ρσ2
X|Sn,
(13.2)
where M ≡R′(q) is the suppliers’ marginal revenue, or equivalently (at the
optimum) the customer’s marginal valuation. Conditional on the trade,
the suppliers know M and q, and therefore the left-hand quantity in equa-
tion (13.2). Knowing the total does not sufﬁce to resolve the two terms on
the right-hand side, the informational (µX|S) and hedging (ρσ2
X|Sn) compo-
nents. It does, nevertheless serve as a useful signal. Denoting this quantity
as ω,
ω = µX|S −ρσ2
X|Sn = σ2
ε µX + σ2
X

X + ε −σ2
ε ρn

σ2ε + σ2
X
.
(13.3)
To the liquidity suppliers, therefore, ω is a noisy signal of X. ω and
X are jointly bivariate normal with means µω = µX. Using the normal
projection results, µX|ω ≡E[X|ω] = µX + (ω −µX)σωX/σ2
ω, where σ2
ω =
σ4
X

σ2
X + σ2
ε + ρ2σ2
nσ4
ε

/

σ2
X + σ2
ε
2 and σωX = σ4
X/

σ2
X + σ2
ε

.
13.3
Equilibrium in the Three Regimes
13.3.1
The Competitive Dealer Market
We conjecture a linear price schedule: P(q) = k0 + k1q, where k0 and k1
are yet-to-be-determined constants. Then M = R′(q) = ∂/∂q[q(k0 + k1q)] =
k0 + 2k1q. Thus ω = (k0 + 2k1q) + qρσ2
X|S. The equilibrium condition is
P(q) = µX|ω, which then becomes
k0 + k1q = µX +
#%
(k0 + 2k1q) + qρσ2
X|S
&
−µX
$
σωX/σ2
ω.
(13.4)
This must hold for all q, giving:
k0 = µX
and
k1 =
ρσ2
Xσ2
ε
ρ2σ2nσ4ε −σ2
X −σ2ε
.
(13.5)
For the price schedule to be upward-sloping (and therefore a valid
equilibrium), it is necessary that σ2
ε

ρ2σ2
nσ2
ε −1

−σ2
X > 0. Furthermore,
∂k1
∂σ2
X
> 0, ∂k1
∂σ2ε
< 0,
∂k1
∂σ2n
< 0,
and
∂k1
∂ρ < 0.


DEPTH
137
The intuition for these results lies in the fact that the essential danger
for the liquidity suppliers is loss associated with buying at P(q) > X or
selling at P(q) < X. Higher σ2
X increases this likelihood. Higher σ2
ε however,
decreases the customer’s certainty in his signal, and so lessens the motive
for informational trade. Higher σ2
n or ρ increases the likelihood that the
customer is trading mostly for liquidity reasons.
It is worth emphasizing that the σ2
ε

ρ2σ2
nσ2
ε −1

−σ2
X > 0 condition can
be violated by reasonable parameter values. In these cases, no equilib-
rium price schedule exists, and the market fails. When this happens,
customers forgo the hedging beneﬁts from trading (risk sharing). If they
could credibly disclose their signals, they would willingly do so, forgoing
any informational advantage from their trades but beneﬁting from better
hedging.
13.3.2
The Limit Order Market
We will consider limit orders on the offer side of the market. A customer
purchase of q shares executes by walking through the book. The price
schedule P(q) gives the price of the last limit order executed.
Let m denote the random marginal valuation of incoming customer,
and let m(q) denote the value of m for which the limit order priced at
P(q) is the last limit order executed. Obviously P(q) ≥E[X|m = m(q)].
That is, the liquidity supplier won’t regret the trade if his is the last
order executed. His order, however, will also be executed with the arrival
of any larger quantities. Taking into account this possibility, his price
must be at least as large as E[X|m ≥m(q)]. That is, any customer with
m > m(q) will purchase more than q units. The competitive equilibrium
condition is therefore P(q) = E[X|m ≥m(q)]. The right-hand-side quan-
tity is sometimes described as the upper-tail (conditional) expectation.
It should be noted that although this condition prevents ex post regret
in expectation across all order sizes, certain trade sizes may still be
unproﬁtable.
The computation of the upper-tail expectation uses the properties of
truncated normal variables (see Greene (2002)). Truncation refers to the
restriction of a random variable to a region above (or below) a given cutoff
point. If X ∼N(µ, σ2) then the truncated expectation is
E[X|X ≥X] = µ + σ

φ
X −µ
σ
'
1 −
X −µ
σ

,
(13.6)
where φ and  are the standard normal density and distribution functions.
Next consider the linear projection when Z and Y are bivariate normal:
X = a0 + a1Z + e. Under bivariate normality Z and e are independent, so
E[X|Z ≥Z] = a0 + a1E[Z|Z ≥Z].


138
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Figure 13.2.
Price and expectations revision
schedules in a limit order book.
Although the equilibrium condition differs from that of the competitive
dealer model, the customer’s ﬁrst-order condition and the joint normality
of ω, X and m. Using (13.2) and (13.3),
E[X|m ≥m] = µX +
σωX
%
qρσ2
X|S −µX + E[m|m ≥m]
&
σ2ω
.
(13.7)
At any given quantity q, a customer will trade if his marginal valua-
tion m ≥P(q). In equilibrium, P(q) = E[X|m ≥m]. This must be solved
numerically, and doing so for the continuum of quantities yields the price
schedule.
Figure 13.2 depicts P(q) for the indicated parameter values. As noted,
this is the upper-tail expectation. The second line in the ﬁgure is the point
expectation given the total size of the order. There are several features of
interest. Both functions are nonlinear (due in part to the nonlinearity of the
upper-tail expectation). Also note that some limit orders will be unprof-
itable ex post. Consider the marginal limit order priced to sell at q = 2. If
the size of the incoming order is in fact q = 2, the limit order is proﬁtable:
P(q = 2) > E[X|q = 2]. The limit order will also execute, however, if q = 8,
in which case P(q = 2) < E[X|q = 8], the limit order incurs a loss. Finally,
limq→0+P(q) > µX = 5, that is, even a inﬁnitesimal purchase will incur a
transaction cost. Another way of putting this is that the bid-ask spread is
positive even for arbitrarily small quantities. (In the competitive dealer
model, in contrast, limq→0+P(q) = limq→0−P(q) = µX.) The pricing sched-
ule is sufﬁciently discriminatory that a ω considerably greater than µX
is necessary before the customer will consider an even an inﬁnitesimal
purchase.


DEPTH
139
The relationship between the supply schedule and expectation revi-
sion functions is broadly similar to the empirical ﬁnding depicted in
ﬁgure 13.1, with the latter lying below the former. Price discrimination in
the book can therefore potentially account for the empirical evidence. We
will subsequently return to this point.
13.3.3
The Monopolistic Dealer
The monopolistic dealer sets a price schedule to maximize E[P(q) −
E[X|q]], where the outer expectation is over all incoming customers (or
equivalently, quantities). As the customer demands depend on P(q), P(q)
implicitly enters into E[X|q]. We will not present the general solution
here, but will instead discuss the solution associated with the parameter
values used to illustrate the limit order book. Using the same parameter
values as in the previous cases, the monopolistic dealer market has prices
and expectations depicted in ﬁgure 13.3.
As in the limit order case, some quantities are unproﬁtable. The rea-
son for this, however, is quite different here. The dealer knows the full
q (as in the competitive dealer case) and is not exposed to an upper-tail
expectation. Instead, the region of losses is necessary to ensure the separa-
tion that makes trades at smaller quantities proﬁtable. If the dealer would,
for example, refuse to sell at q > 6, customers who sought large amounts
would submit the largest feasible order, pooling at q = 6. This would lead
to losses at q = 6 larger than the ﬁgure indicates.
Figure 13.3.
Price and expectations revision schedules
for a monopolistic dealer.


140
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
13.4
Additional Empirical Evidence on
Limit Order Book Price Schedules
Sandas (2001) estimates for his OMX data a modiﬁed version of the
Glosten model. Sandas’s model is dynamic in the sense of allowing for suc-
cessive order arrivals. It is assumed that the book is in a static equilibrium
prior to each order arrival. The speciﬁcation also assumes an exogenous
order process. Finally, although the earlier exposition was simpliﬁed by
allowing prices to be continuous, Glosten (1994) actually uses discrete
prices. Sandas’s model uses discrete prices as well.
The security value (conditional on public information) is Xt, with
dynamics: Xt = Xt−1 + dt. The increment dt reﬂects the information con-
tent of orders that have arrived through time t and additional public
nontrade information. As before, we’ll analyze only the sell side of the
book and arriving buy orders. Treatment of the bid side is symmetric. The
ask (sell) side of the book is described by a price vector (p1 p2 . . . pk)
ordered so that p1 is the lowest (most aggressive). The associated vector
of quantities is (Q1 Q2 . . . Qk).
The incoming order is a purchase of b shares, where the distribu-
tion of b is assumed exponential with parameter λ: f (b) = e−bλ/λ. The
revision in beliefs subsequent to the order is given by: E[Xt+1|Xt, b] =
Xt + αb, where α > 0. The order processing cost is γ. If a limit order priced
at p1 is executed, the proﬁt (per unit traded) is p1 −γ −E[Xt+1|Xt, b] =
p1 −Xt −γ −αb.
Suppose that the sell limit orders at the price p1 are ordered in time
priority, the trader wish to sell an inﬁnitesimal amount at p1, and the
cumulative quantity (her order plus everyone who is ahead of her) is q.
Her order will execute if the incoming quantity is at least as high as q. Her
expected proﬁt conditional on execution is
Eπ1 = E[p1 −Xt −γ −αb|b ≥q] =
( ∞
q
(p1 −Xt −γ −αb)f (b)db
= −e−q/λ(Xt + γ + α(q + λ) −p1).
She will be indifferent to adding her order to the queue at this price when
q = Q1 where Q1 = (−Xt −γ −αλ −p1)/α. This might be negative for Xt
just below p1, in which case Q1 = 0. At p2 the expected proﬁt for executed
orders is:
Eπ2 = E[p2 −Xt −γ −αb|b ≥Q1 + q] =
( ∞
Q1+q
(p1 −Xt −γ −αb)f (b)db
= −e−(q+Q1)/λ(Xt + γ + α(q + λ) −p2 + αQ1).
The point of indifference is given by Q2 = (−Xt −γ −αλ + p2 −αQ1)/α.
Quantities Q3, Q4, . . . are computed in similar fashion. Figure 13.4 depicts


DEPTH
141
Figure 13.4.
Price and expectations revision schedules in a
limit order book with discrete price levels.
the ask side of the book for parameter values Xt = 0, α = 0.1, γ = 0, and
λ = 5. As in the continuous case, the expectation revision function lies
entirely below the price schedule.
In Sandas’s framework, there are two sorts of conditions that can be
used to estimate the expectation revision coefﬁcient α. One estimate is
based on the subsequent dynamic revision in prices, similar to that dis-
cussed in connection with ﬁgure 13.1. The other is based on the break-even
conditions already derived for the quantities on the book. The estimates
differ substantially. The break-even-based schedules are generally closer
to the observed schedules, the dynamic revision-based schedules are still
relatively shallow. Tests for overidentifying restrictions strongly reject
the joint use of break-even and dynamic conditions, however. The price
schedules on the book are still too steep relative to the price revisions.
With a view toward future research directions, Sandas examines a
number of model assumptions that could potentially lead to misspeci-
ﬁcation. The results suggest allowing for a more ﬂexible distribution of
incoming order sizes, time variation in parameters, endogenous order
sizes, and effects related to intertrade times.
13.5
Hybrid Markets and Depth Improvement
In the competitive dealer market, dealers can condition on the total size
of the incoming order. Limit order traders do not have this opportunity.
Seppi (1997) models a hybrid market in which a public limit order book is
augmented by a dealer. The dealer must yield to public orders: He cannot


142
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Figure 13.5.
Depth improvement.
sell at a price while public customer offers at that price are left unexecuted.
On the other hand, he can condition on the total order size in deciding
how much to sell.
The situation can be depicted in the context of the Sandas version of the
Glosten model (ﬁgure 13.5). An incoming purchase order for eight units
would normally execute by walking through the book, buying ﬁve units at
a price of one and three additional units at a price of two. But the revised
expectation conditional on this purchase is only 0.8. The dealer would
like to displace the sellers at P = 2, but cannot, due to public priority.
He can, however, sell three units at P = 1. This is permissible because all
public sellers at that price are satisﬁed. The dealer’s expected proﬁt from
doing this is the shaded area.
The phenomenon is sometimes called depth improvement (see
Bacidore (2002)). The buyer purchases at a lower average price than the
he would have expected given the state of the book. From his viewpoint,
more was available at P = 1 than the book was showing. The public limit
order traders, on the other hand, are disadvantaged. In equilibrium, they
will be less willing to provide liquidity and will post smaller quantities.
The practice whereby a dealer outbids public interest was widely termed
eighthing (when the tick size in U.S. equity markets was $0.125) and is
sometimes now described as pennying. The depth improvement mech-
anism arises from a last-mover advantage enjoyed by the dealer. Rock
(1990) discusses the general features of this phenomenon. He notes that it
can also lead to “price improvement,” because the dealer may buy or sell
at prices that are better than the best published bid and offer.


14
14
Trading Costs: Retrospective
and Comparative
This chapter and the next address trading costs and their relation to strat-
egy and institutional features. Economic logic suggests a deﬁnite ordering
for these topics. Most economic data are the outcomes of strategies that
are, at least from agents’ ex ante perspectives, optimal. Thus arises the
ideal paradigm of ﬁrst deﬁning agents’ objectives, then enumerating the
feasible strategies, mapping these strategies to costs, determining optimal
(cost minimizing) strategies, and ﬁnally performing econometric analy-
sis of observed outcomes taking into account their dependence on all
prior stages of the process. The exposition will follow this sequence but
is heavily shaped by the limitations of the data. The present chapter
describes the microstructure literature that aims primarily at comparisons
of alternative trading venues. The objectives and trading strategies con-
sidered in this context are mostly simple ones. The next chapter describes
more realistic trading problems, but in a framework that is more normative
and less relevant for analysis of actual data samples.
In most of the economic models considered to this point, trading prob-
lems have been posed as investment or portfolio problems, albeit ones
with short horizons. Neither the identiﬁcation of a trading strategy distinct
from the investment decision nor the imputation of a trading cost as such
has been useful or necessary. In practice, however, although investment
and trading decisions should be made jointly, they are usually analyzed
and implemented separately. This separation is most clearly visible in
managed portfolios, where allocation decisions are made by an investment
manager (stock picker) and the actual buying and selling is conducted
by trading desk. The framing perspectives of the decisions can be char-
acterized plainly as long-term versus short-term, but there are usually
143


144
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
fundamental and far-reaching differences in the skills and information
sets of the two groups.
The portfolio manager’s communication of an order to the trading desk
(“desk release”) is only the ﬁrst step in a chain of delegation. The desk may
assign the order to be worked by particular broker. The broker will send
the order to a particular trading venue. At each step involving discretion
there is an agency relationship, which must be monitored and managed
according to some observable (and ideally, quantiﬁable) criterion. The
trading costs considered in this chapter are imputations that serve this
purpose.
14.1
Overview
Some components of trading cost are direct and obvious. In this cate-
gory fall commissions, transfer taxes, order submissions fees, and various
account service fees. These are usually itemized on the customer’s invoice
or account statement, and so are easily identiﬁed. I will generally ignore
these costs, noting that in practice they can be added back in at the
ﬁnal stage. I suppress them not because they are trivial but because their
inclusion clutters the analysis and obfuscates more subtle effects.
Trading involves many indirect costs. The most important (and usu-
ally the most easily identiﬁable) is the price concession associated with an
execution. This is usually measured by the difference between the actual
transaction price and some benchmark price that represents a “fair” mar-
ket value. There are many possible choices for a benchmark, but the most
common is the quote midpoint prevailing prior to the trade. This is gen-
erally called the effective cost, and corresponds to c in the basic Roll
model.
Finally, because many trading strategies do not culminate in an execu-
tion, we need to impute a cost for failures. This often the most difﬁcult
determination because the consequences of failure must be assessed
relative to some original intention that is rarely fully articulated.
14.2
The Implementation Shortfall
The implementation shortfall, initially suggested by Perold (1988), is a
construct that both provides intuition into the aforementioned effects and
contains as special cases most commonly used measures of trading cost.
It is based on the divergence between actual and idealized investment
cash ﬂows. More precisely, it is the difference between the cash ﬂows for
an actual portfolio and those of a hypothetical paper portfolio for which
purchases and sales occur at benchmark prices.


TRADING COSTS: RETROSPECTIVE AND COMPARATIVE
145
The mechanics can be illustrated with a simple two-date model.
Suppose that there are i = 1, . . . , N securities, with the ﬁrst being cash
(the numeraire). Let n0 be the vector of actual initial portfolio holdings (in
shares, or, for i = 1, dollars), and let π0 denote the vector of initial bench-
mark prices. The paper portfolio is described by a vector of holdings, v.
This is a “desired” portfolio and reﬂects a hypothetical reallocation by
the portfolio manager assuming that purchases and sales could be accom-
plished at the benchmark prices. Thus, the initial values of the actual
and paper portfolios are equal: n′
0π0 = v′π0. The reallocation in the actual
portfolio is accomplished by purchases and sales at actual trade prices p,
and the ﬁnal share holdings in the actual portfolio are n1. The actual and
desired holdings will diverge due to, among other things, failed trading
attempts. Because a cash account is included among the assets, the real-
location is accomplished with no net cashﬂow in or out of the portfolio:
(n1 −n0)′p = 0.
The implementation shortfall is the difference in terminal values
between the paper and actual portfolios, with both valued at end of period
benchmark prices π1, and may be written as:
Implementation
Shortfall
= (v −n1)′π1
= (n1 −n0)′(p −π0)
	



Execution cost
+ (v −n1)′(π1 −π0)
	



Opportunity cost
.
(14.1)
An element n1,i −n0,i for i > 1 represents the number of shares of secu-
rity i bought (if positive) or sold (if negative); the ﬁrst element n1,1 −n0,1
is the change in the cash account (noting that π0,1 = π1,1 = p1 = 1). The
ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of equation (14.1) thus represents the
cost of actual executions accomplished at actual trade prices rather than
benchmark prices. The second term is driven by the divergence between
actual and desired holdings and the change in benchmark prices. The
implementation shortfall thus impounds the cost of establishing a partic-
ular position and the cost of divergence between that position and the one
judged (by some other criteria) to be optimal. In other contexts, the second
(opportunity) cost is known as the tracking error.
When the order is executed at one time but at multiple prices, p is
interpreted as the share-weighted average execution price. This is also
appropriate when the order is executed over time, as long as the agent
being measured (trader, broker, etc.) in fact had discretion over the tim-
ing. In this case, the benchmark π0 should be taken prior to the ﬁrst
execution.
Ex post either or both components of the realized implementation
shortfall may be negative. An execution cost may be negative, for exam-
ple, if the stock is purchased below the benchmark. An opportunity cost


146
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
may be negative if an intended purchase was not completed for a stock
that subsequently declined in value.
The separation of investment and trading decisions is implicit in
the assumed constancy of the desired portfolio. In practice, a portfolio
manager would certainly take expected trading costs into account when
determining v. It is furthermore likely that v would be revised dynami-
cally, conditional on price movements and the outcomes of previous order
strategies. Thus, (v −n1)(π1 −π0) establishes (approximately) the worst
possible case. Consider a buy order that has failed because the price has
moved out of range, π1 ≫π0. The opportunity cost term is approximately
the cost of buying the shares at the new, higher price. But at the new price,
quite possibly the portfolio manager might seek fewer shares. This sug-
gests that the real opportunity cost may actually be lower than the formula
suggests.
Subject to this qualiﬁcation, the distribution of the implementation
shortfall, perhaps as summarized by its mean and variance, is a plausible
basis for evaluating a trading strategy. Bearing this in mind, it is useful to
consider the distributions that common strategies might imply.
First, most strategies will generally face a trade-off between expected
execution and opportunity costs. Suppose we take the quote midpoint as
the benchmark, and we wish to purchase a stock. A market order will
achieve execution with certainty, but at a price generally above the mid-
point. This will give a positive execution cost, but zero opportunity cost.
Alternatively, we might submit a limit order priced below the midpoint.
If the limit order is hit, the execution cost component will be negative. If
the limit order is not hit, however, it is most likely to be that the price has
increased, leading to a positive opportunity cost.
Second, assuming typical price dynamics, execution costs are likely to
have low variance. Most limit orders are submitted near the quote mid-
point. If there is no ﬁll, the execution cost is zero. Otherwise, it is the
distance between the limit price and the quote midpoint. For the unﬁlled
portion of the order, however, opportunity costs are likely to be highly
volatile, as π1 −π0 is the price change over a possibly long horizon. There
is also likely to be a trade-off between the expectation and volatility of the
trading cost. A market order will usually have high expected trading cost,
but with little variation. (A purchase order, for example, will execute at
or very close to the ask.) A limit order priced far away from the market
will have a low expected shortfall but high volatility. This trade-off drives
some of the more formal trading models considered in the next chapter.
It is also noteworthy that the implementation shortfall is deﬁned at
the level of the portfolio rather than the individual security. The total
volatility will then reﬂect correlation across securities in the outcomes of
limit order strategies.
Over both sides of the trade, and of course in the aggregate, execution
costs are a zero-sum game as long as everyone uses the same benchmark π0.


TRADING COSTS: RETROSPECTIVE AND COMPARATIVE
147
Opportunity costs, on the other hand, are measured relative to desired
positions. There is no mechanism to ensure that unconsummated demand
equals unconsummated supply.
Infeasibility of aggregate desired positions can easily lead to misleading
estimates of aggregate implementation shortfalls. For example, suppose
that a dealer bids $99 for one unit of the security, and offers one unit
at $101, and that the rules of the market require that these quotes be
ﬁrm (available for immediate execution). There are 100 traders following
the security. They all receive the same information, a positive signal that
causes the security value to increase to $110. At this point, they all “simul-
taneously” attempt to lift the dealer’s offer by submitting marketable limit
orders for one unit, priced at $101. Subject to the vagaries of transmission
delays, the ﬁrst buy order to arrive will succeed, at an execution cost of
$1(= $101 −$100, the quote midpoint). At this point, the dealer revises
her quotes to $109 bid, offered at $111 (thus bracketing the new value).
Each of the other 99 customers will perceive an opportunity cost of $10
(=$110 −$100) and may well attribute this to sloth on the part of their bro-
kers or their systems. Thus, the aggregate opportunity cost is $990, for an
aggregate implementation shortfall of $991. It is nonsensical, of course, to
suggest that aggregate welfare could be enhanced by this amount if market
frictions or broker ineptitude were eliminated.
The problem is that the benchmark price of π0 = $100 does not come
close, given the new information, to clearing the market. The proﬁts real-
ized by the lucky ﬁrst trader are akin to lottery winnings. Individual
traders might attempt to gain advantage by increasing the speed of their
order submission linkages, but because only one trader can arrive ﬁrst,
the situation is fundamentally a tournament (in the economic sense).
14.2.1
The Implementation Cost for
Liquidity Suppliers
Is implementation cost a useful criterion for liquidity suppliers? The
question is important because although institutional trading desks have
traditionally been liquidity demanders, the modern variant may also seek
proﬁts by opportunistically supplying liquidity. Furthermore, empiri-
cal analysis may require imputation of implementation costs when the
trading motive underlying the order is unknown.
If v = n0, implying that the agent already holds his desired position,
the implementation shortfall reduces to −(n1 −n0)(π1 −p), the minimiza-
tion of which is equivalent to maximization of the ex post proﬁt on shares
bought or sold (assuming that the ﬁnal position is marked to the ﬁnal
benchmark price). The implementation shortfall can thus be interpreted
as plausible objective function for a liquidity supplier. The decomposi-
tion into execution and opportunity costs, however, is somewhat strained.
For one thing, given that v = n0, the opportunity cost actually applies to


148
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
ﬁlled orders. The risk-neutral liquidity suppliers (such as the dealers in
the sequential trade models or the limit order traders in Glosten 1994)
are indifferent to whether their bids or offers are executed. Conditional
on execution, of course, their orders are priced to satisfy a zero expected
proﬁt condition. But in the absence of execution, they incur no loss.
14.2.2
Benchmark Prices
The execution cost based on the pretrade bid-ask midpoint (BAM) is also
known as the effective cost. Since 2001, the U.S. SEC has required U.S.
equity markets to compute effective costs and make summary statistics
available on the Web (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 1996).
The rule (605, formerly numbered 11ac1-5 and commonly referred to as
“dash ﬁve”) also requires computation of the realized cost. The realized
cost is the execution cost computed using as a benchmark the BAM pre-
vailing ﬁve minutes subsequent to the time the market received the order.
Letting pt denote the trade price and mt the prevailing quote midpoint, the
relationship between the effective and realized costs for a buy order is:
pt −mt
	



Effective cost
= pt −mt+5
	



Realized Cost
+ mt+5 −mt.
(14.2)
The difference between effective and realized costs, mt+5 −mt, is some-
times used as an estimate of the price impact of the trade. The realized
cost can also be interpreted as the revenue of the dealer who sold to the
customer (at pt) and then covered his position at the subsequent BAM.
When a timely BAM is not available, practitioners resort to alterna-
tives. One common benchmark used by institutional fund managers is
the value-weighted average price (VWAP) of all trades over a particular
interval, typically one day. VWAP is easier to compute than the effective
or realized cost because it does not require matching by time. It is in a
sense the answer to the question, “How well did we do relative to the rep-
resentative buyer or seller?” It is commonly used to evaluate brokers. In
this connection, we might raise several objections. The ﬁrst is that orders
vary in their degree of difﬁculty. A broker who is sent difﬁcult orders
will fare poorly in a VWAP evaluation. Second, if we account for a large
proportion of a day’s volume, our weighted average execution price will
approximate VWAP (they’re almost the same thing) irrespective of how
the orders were handled. Third, VWAP benchmarks can be gamed (see
Harris (2003)).
Other benchmarks include the previous day’s close or the same day’s
close. Among all benchmark choices, these are likely to lead to the
most variable cost estimates. This is because they will tend to be fur-
ther removed in time from the actual trade and so will impound price
movements over a longer period. The previous day’s close, however, is


TRADING COSTS: RETROSPECTIVE AND COMPARATIVE
149
of some special interest as a benchmark price due to the large number of
studies based on daily data that assume feasibility of trade at that price in
formulating trading strategies.
14.3
Applications of the Implementation Shortfall
14.3.1
Institutional-Level Order Data
Within the professional investment community, monitoring trading costs
is regarded as good professional practice (see, for example, CFA Insti-
tute 2002). Subject to qualiﬁcations already discussed, a portfolio manager
can measure the cost of the fund’s trades using the implementation short-
fall approach. The measurements are more useful, however, if there is
some basis for comparison. Raw trading data can be reverse-engineered
to construct holdings and discern strategies, so managers will generally
avoid disclosure. Thus, a small industry has arisen to provide anonymity
and expertise. Portfolio managers turn their order data over to a ﬁrm,
which then computes trading cost estimates. Finally the ﬁrm shares
summary statistics computed across all its clients.
The institutional process starts when the portfolio manager sends an
order to its trading desk (desk release). The order at this stage is a general
indication of quantity, price limits, urgency, and so on. The order (or a
component of it) is then sent to a broker (“broker release”). At this stage,
the instructions are usually more explicit. The broker will then attempt
to execute the order (possibly breaking it into smaller pieces) on one or
more trading venues.
The timing of the benchmark BAM depends on which stages of the
process are being evaluated. If the intent is to measure the cost of the
entire trading process, then the BAM should taken as of the desk release
time. The BAM at the broker release time would be used to evaluate
brokers.
The opportunity cost depends on π1. Assuming that for consistency
with π0 we use the BAM, how far into the future should we go, subsequent
to commencement of the order strategy? In principle, the consequences
of an unﬁlled order may persist indeﬁnitely. Portfolio managers generally
revise the target portfolio (v), however, in reaction to large price changes.
This revision effectively terminates the original trading instructions and
so should limit the accumulation of opportunity costs. In practice, how-
ever, this termination is rarely explicitly documented. Opportunity cost
calculations instead often invoke a ﬁxed horizon that is long enough
to encompass most trading strategies but short relative to portfolio
turnover. The Plexus Group, for example, computes the opportunity cost
of unexecuted orders over a 30-day window.


150
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
A number of ﬁrms in the trading cost industry have shared order
data with academic researchers (having taken steps to maintain cus-
tomer anonymity). Studies of Plexus data include Keim and Madhavan
(1995, 1996, 1997), Conrad, Johnson, and Wahal (2001, 2002, 2003), and
Irvine, Lipson, and Puckett (2006). Analyses of SEI data include Chan and
Lakonishok (1993, 1995, 1997). The aims of these studies vary. Some seek
to characterize the general features of institutional order strategies and
their determinants. Among these results, it is particularly noteworthy
that the ﬁll (execution) rates on these orders are quite high. Keim and
Madhavan (1995) ﬁnd average completion rates of about 95%. This is
important because it suggests that opportunity costs for unﬁlled orders
(which are difﬁcult to measure) are apt to be smaller than execution costs.
14.3.2
Market-Level Order Data
Real-time and historical data on the basic market and limit orders entering
a venue are becoming increasingly available. Relative to the institutional
data considered before, the main limitation of these data is that it is gen-
erally impossible to link sequences of orders to reconstruct full order
strategies. Also in contrast to the institutional-level data, execution rates
are low. This is easily explained by noting that a desk order that even-
tually achieves 99% execution may have been worked using a strategy
where limit orders were used and frequently revised. In the market-level
order data, the revisions will appear as disconnected cancellations and
submissions.
The low completion rate of the individual orders makes the opportu-
nity cost imputation important. Analyzing a sample of NYSE limit orders,
Harris and Hasbrouck (1996) assign a cost for canceled orders by assum-
ing a hypothetical ﬁll at the opposing quote prevailing at the time of
cancellation. Expired orders are treated in a similar fashion.
The execution of retail customer market orders in U.S. equity markets
became an important issue in the early 1990s. Concern initially arose due
to increased fragmentation, internalization, and payment for order ﬂow.
This established the context for numerous studies of comparative execu-
tion costs across venues. The earliest studies analyzed execution costs
inferred from trade and quote data (as described in the next subsection).
A small number of later publications report costs computed from order
data (see Bacidore, Ross, and Soﬁanos (2003); Werner (2003)). Bessem-
binder, Maxwell, and Venkataraman (2005) analyze effective costs in the
U.S. bond market.
Since 2001, summary statistics on execution costs have been com-
puted and made available by the various market centers (under SEC
rule 605, formerly 11ac1-5). The methodology is not completely straight-
forward, however: The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2001)
describes the various interpretations, qualiﬁcations, and exclusions.


TRADING COSTS: RETROSPECTIVE AND COMPARATIVE
151
Furthermore, the raw data are generally not available, nor are the summary
statistics independently audited or veriﬁed.
14.3.3
Market-Level Trade and Quote Data
In the absence of order data, execution cost imputations are often based
on reported trades and quotes, where it is assumed that an execution price
above the BAM originates from a market buy order, and below, from a sell
order. Mathematically this implies that the execution cost is |p −BAM|.
To distinguish this from a computation based on order data, we will
describe it as trade-based.
Trade-based effective cost estimates have been widely used in stud-
ies of comparative market quality and to assess the effects of industry
practices and regulations. Representative studies include Lee (1993),
Huang (1996), Battalio (1997a, 1997b, 1998, 2003), Bessembinder and
Kaufman (1997), Bessembinder (1999, 2003a), Venkataraman (2001),
Peterson (2003), Bacidore (1997), Degryse (1999), de Jong, Nijman, and
Roell (1995), and Renaldo (2002).
Issues that generally arise in the computation of trade-based effective
cost estimates include the accuracy of the quote and trade time stamps and
the validity of the buy/sell direction inference. Time stamps are of concern
because reporting conventions differ for trades and quotes. Because stale
bids and asks will tend to be hit when it is to the advantage of the incom-
ing order, quotes will usually be updated promptly. Trade reports, on the
other hand, simply make public information known to those involved in
the trade. If trades are reported with a lag, the quote used to compute the
execution cost may actually have been posted subsequent to the trade.
Because the quotes will tend to move in the direction of the trade, a small
delay will tend to reduce the estimated effective cost. A large delay may
lead to error in the buy-sell inference (e.g., if a buyer-initiated transac-
tion report is delayed to a time when the quote midpoint lies above the
reported trade price). The time stamps in automated markets are gener-
ally more accurate. Even here, though, we would do well to remember that
quote and trade streams are often consolidated from several venues. The
delays inherent in consolidation may not be uniform, leading to trades
and quotes that are improperly ordered across venues. The same trade-
quote synchronization problems addressed earlier in connection with the
signing of trades arise here (see chapter 9, note 1).
The trade direction inference is affected by the existence of hidden
orders and other latent liquidity mechanisms. For example, a buy market
order may execute at a price at or below the BAM computed on the basis
of the prevailing visible quote if there is an aggressively priced hidden sell
limit order. This may also occur if a market maker, possibly conditioning
on the size or other attribute of the order, betters the prevailing visible
offer.


152
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
14.3.4
Selection Effects
The obvious way to analyze execution cost estimates is to compute sum-
mary statistics over the full sample and subsamples of interest (e.g., by
trading venue). Additionally, execution costs might be regressed against
characteristics of the stock, market conditions, and/or the order. The
results might then be used to guide customers in directing their orders and
other aspects of trading strategy. One might, for example, use regression
estimates to project the execution cost of a contemplated order strategy.
Although these sorts of analyses are sensible ﬁrst steps, they are based
on samples that are generated with a selection bias. The source of this
bias lies in the decisions of the traders who submitted the orders. Cor-
rections to deal with this bias have been implemented by Madhavan and
Cheng (1997) and Bessembinder (2004).


15
15
Prospective Trading Costs
and Execution Strategies
In this chapter we discuss minimization of expected implementation cost
in two stylized dynamic trading problems. Both analyses are set in discrete
time, and in each instance a trader must achieve a purchase by a dead-
line. The ﬁrst problem concerns long-term order splitting and timing. A
large quantity is to be purchased over a horizon that spans multiple days.
Strategic choice involves quantities to be sent to the market at each time,
but order choice is not modeled. The second problem involves purchase
of a single unit over a shorter horizon, typically several hours. Strategic
choice involves order type (market or limit), and (if a limit order is chosen)
price.
15.1
Models of Order Splitting (Slicing) and Timing
15.1.1
The Basic Problem
The present analysis follows Bertsimas and Lo (1998), a classic and read-
able treatment of the problem. Related work includes Almgren and Chriss
(2000) and Almgren (2003). Over t = 1, . . . , T periods, we seek to mini-
mize the expected cost of purchasing ¯s units of the security. The timed
purchases are st, t = 1, . . . , T, and completion requires ¯s =  st. At the
beginning of period t, the number of shares remaining in the order is
wt = wt−1 −st−1.
The price dynamics are partially stochastic and partially driven by our
trades. The latter effects certainly include transitory components (such
as noninformational components of the bid-ask spread). It is also com-
mon in strategy analyses to allow trades to have permanent price effects.
153


154
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
To facilitate the reader’s access to this literature, this presentation will
also allow for permanent effects. It should be emphasized, however, that
trading strategies are formulated from the perspective of a particular agent
who is presumed to know both who he is and what he knows. Unless the
buyer expects to alter the real characteristics of the ﬁrm, his trades will
have no permanent effect on cash ﬂows or the security market price (see
section 5.6).1
Nevertheless allowing for a permanent impact, the quote midpoint at
the end of period t is mt:
mt = mt−1 + µ + λst + εt,
(15.1)
where µ is the drift, λst term is the permanent price impact, and εt is a ran-
dom innovation uncorrelated with our trades. The interpretation of drift in
this situation is unusual. Generally in microstructure models, drift is asso-
ciated with an unconditional expected return and is likely to be negligible
in comparison with other terms (section 3.3.1). In this context, however,
drift reﬂects the buyer’s beliefs about short-term dynamics that may be
large. For example, if the buyer believes that awareness of a recent news
announcement is likely to diffuse over the next hour, she may believe that
there will be a large price adjustment over the hour, that is, a drift over
the trading horizon that is far from zero (and also unrelated to her trades).
Temporary impact is modeled as a discrepancy between the quote
midpoint and the trade price, pt:
pt = mt + γst.
(15.2)
γst is a transient impact because it does not persist over time or cumulate
over multiple trades.
The general approach to solving this kind of problem is dynamic pro-
gramming via backward optimization. This will be used in subsequent
analyses, but it is not actually necessary here. The reason is that no new
information develops over time that might cause us to modify our initial
plans. If the security price goes up unexpectedly (a large positive εt), for
example, we will regret not having purchased more stock earlier. We have
learned nothing new, however, that will help us predict the future price
change. We can therefore set up the problem as a static optimization. From
this perspective, subject to the constraint ¯s =  st, the problem is:
min
s1, ..., sT Et
 T

t=1
ptst

=
min
s1, ..., sT
T

t=1
st

tµ + λ
t

j=1
sj + γst

.
(15.3)
With T = 3, for example, the objective function is:
µ(s1 + 2s2 + 3s3) + γ

s2
1 + s2
2 + s2
3

+ λ

s2
1 + s2
2 + s2
3 + s1s2 + s1s3 + s2s3

.


PROSPECTIVE TRADING COSTS AND EXECUTION STRATEGIES
155
If µ = 0, the objective function is symmetric in its arguments, and the
optimal trading strategy is level: s∗
t = ¯s/T. With µ̸ = 0,
s∗
t = ¯s
 1
T + (T + 1) −2t
2(2γ + λ) µ

.
(15.4)
The order size changes linearly over time. With positive drift, we will
accelerate a buy order. The amount of the acceleration depends positively
on µ, of course, but it also depends inversely on γ and λ. As these increase,
departures from the level strategy become more expensive.
In some respects the order slicing strategy resembles that of the
informed trader in the Kyle model (section 7.2). Although in both cases
trading is distributed over time, there are some important differences.
Kyle’s informed trader conditions on price and trades so as to leave
no traces in the form of autocorrelations that might signal his infor-
mation. The trading strategy here, however, is consistent with positive
autocorrelation in the order ﬂow.
15.1.2
Slowly Decaying Nonstochastic
Temporary Effects
The temporary effects of our trades in this speciﬁcation affect only the
current trade price. This might be a tenable approximation if our trades
account for only a small portion of overall activity. As the relative scale
of the purchase increases, however, it is more likely that transient effects
will spill over into subsequent periods. As a ﬁrst approximation, it is
reasonable to allow the initial impact to decay gradually over time. This
can be incorporated into the analysis by the addition of a second state
variable,
At =
t−1

i=0
θist−i + θtA0,
(15.5)
where θ is the geometric weight (0 ≤θ < 1). The ﬁrst term reﬂects our
trades. The second term can be viewed as summarizing the delayed effect
of others’ trades prior to the start of our own. For t > 1, At = st + θAt−1.
The trade price is:
pt = mt + γAt + εt.
(15.6)
To isolate the effect of our own trades, assume for the moment that other
trading was sufﬁciently distant in the past that A0 ≈0. In this case, the ﬁrst
of our trades will be cheaper than later trades because it will not incur any
persistent cost components of any earlier trades. On the other hand, the
ﬁrst trade will raise the costs for all later trades.
Balancing these two effects leads to U-shaped trading strategies.
Figure 15.1(A) depicts the execution strategies for various horizons.
Panel B graphs the initial execution on the ﬁrst trade for a three-period


156
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Figure 15.1.
Characteristics of long-term trading strategies.
horizon, as a function of θ. With θ = 0, the ﬁrst trade share is 1/3 (as there is
no persistence). This is also true, however, when θ = 1: When persistence
of the temporary impact is complete, the temporary impact is indistin-
guishable from the permanent impact.
We now indicate the effect of nonzero starting values A0. It turns out
that the ﬁrst trade share is linearly declining in A0. Thus, if previous trades
have pushed up the temporary price component, we will tend to delay our
own purchases, waiting until the initial cost component has decayed. If
A0 is sufﬁciently large, however, we will actually sell. In this case, the
opportunity to take advantage of a temporarily inﬂated price by selling
initially outweighs the gains from pursuing our overall purchase plan.
Similarly, if A0 is sufﬁciently low, it is optimal to buy shares in excess of
¯s, selling them at a proﬁt when the price has risen.
15.1.3
Slowly Decaying Stochastic
Temporary Effects
It might be expected that the orders of others over our trading hori-
zon would induce random variation in the evolution of At. This can be
modeled by adding a disturbance:
At = st + θAt−1 + ut.
(15.7)
Of course, if others’ trades are correlated (as ours are), it might be desir-
able to allow for serial correlation in the ut. Stochastic components to At
complicate the solution process. Subsequent to time zero, we might seek
to modify our trading plans in response to random changes in At. Static
optimization is no longer appropriate, and the solution requires dynamic
programming.
To implement this, we ﬁrst deﬁne a value function, Vt, deﬁned as the
total expected expenditure on all purchases from time t onward, assum-
ing that we make the best possible decisions at time t and subsequently.
Because the program must be completed by time T, VT+1 = 0. At any time


PROSPECTIVE TRADING COSTS AND EXECUTION STRATEGIES
157
t ≤T, Vt will depend on the most recently observed quote midpoint mt−1,
the number of units left to be purchased wt, and the past-trade statistic
At−1: Vt = Vt(mt−1, wt, At−1). At time T, the entire remainder must be
purchased, so sT = wT. The expected cost is:
VT(mT−1, wT, AT−1) = ETpTsT = ET(mT−1 + λwT + γAT + εT)wT
= (mT−1 + θ γAT−1 + (λ + γ)wT)wT.
(15.8)
Looking ahead at time T −1, we expect our remaining expenditures to be:
VT−1(mT−2, wT−1, AT−2)
= max
sT−1 ET−1

VT(mT−1, wT, AT−1) + pT−1sT−1

.
(15.9)
To ﬁnd the optimal sT−1, we substitute into the right-hand side using
(15.8) and the dynamics for the state variables and maximize using
differentiation. VT−2, . . . , V1 are determined in a similar fashion.
The essential features of the solution, though, appear in
s∗
T−1 = wT−1
2
−
γ(1 −θ)θ
2[γ(2 −θ) + λ]AT−2.
(15.10)
This is, in fact, identical to the solution one obtains for the deterministic
At. In the deterministic case, though, we can compute AT−2 given what
is known as of t = 1. In the stochastic case, we must wait until AT−2 is
realized before making the trading decision. In both cases, however, the
base solution (trading half the remaining amount) is augmented with a
term that declines in AT−2.
Exercise 15.1 (Predictable variation in the permanent impact
parameter) Suppose that quote midpoint dynamics are given by
mt = mt−1 + λtst + εt, where the λt for t = 1, 2, 3 are known positive
parameters. The trade price is simply pt = mt (there is no transient
price impact). Show that for T = 3 with s1 + s2 + s3 = 1 the optimal
order sizes are
s1 = 1 +
2λ1λ3
λ2
2 −4λ2λ3
; s2 = λ1(λ2 −2λ3)
λ2(λ2 −4λ3); s3 = −
λ1
λ2 −4λ3
.
Note that depending on how λt evolves, the optimal purchase may
involve an initial sale (!). For example, when {λ1 = 2, λ2 = 1, λ3 = 1/2},
{s1 = −1, s2 = 0, s3 = 2}. The buyer is initially short selling (to drive
the price down) and then purchasing to cover the short and establish
the required position when price impact is low. Caution is warranted,
however, because counterparties (and regulatory authorities) may
view the intent of the initial sale as establishment of an “artiﬁcial”
(i.e., “manipulative”) price.


158
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
15.2
Models of Order Placement
The next analysis also deals with a purchase under a time constraint but
with different emphasis. In the models of the previous section, trading
costs are approximations that abstract from the details of order submis-
sion, and planned orders execute with certainty. This section considers
dynamic order strategy. The strategic variable is order choice (limit or
market, i.e., “make or take”), and execution is uncertain.
Though the present model examines the details of order submission,
quantity is regarded as ﬁxed (or determined in some prior optimization).
The classic strategy for achieving execution involves initially placing a
limit order, repricing it more aggressively over time, and ultimately (if
necessary) using a market order. Angel (1994) and Harris (1998) analyze
order choice strategies for various trading problems. The model discussed
here is adapted from Harris.
15.2.1
The Basic Barrier Diffusion Model
The objective is to minimize the expected purchase price for a single unit
of the security. The price follows a continuous time diffusion, but order
decisions are only made at the discrete times t = 1, . . . , T. The security
must be purchased by the close of period T. At the beginning of each
period, if the security has not yet been purchased, the agent may either
submit a market order or a limit order. If the agent submits a limit order,
he must decide on the limit price Lt (a continuous variable).
On the face of things, this problem seems very similar to the one-period
order choice decisions considered in the single-agent and Parlour models
discussed in chapter 12. In those settings, though, it is only necessary
to model the execution mechanism. Price dynamics do not enter in any
essential way. Multiperiod decisions are fundamentally different because
when a limit order fails to execute, it is generally because the market
price has moved away from the limit order. The trader is forced to chase
the market, eventually achieving execution at an unfavorable price. This
cost and its effect on strategy depend on the trader’s beliefs about price
movements.
The starting point is a simple model of price dynamics and limit order
execution termed here the diffusion-barrier model. Various aspects of this
approach are used in Handa and Schwartz (1996), Harris (1998), and Lo,
MacKinlay, and Zhang (2002). Brieﬂy, the market price follows a contin-
uous time diffusion (Weiner) process, and a limit order executes when
the market price hits the barrier corresponding to the limit price. More
speciﬁcally, the price is pt with dynamics:
dpt = µdt + σdz,
(15.11)


PROSPECTIVE TRADING COSTS AND EXECUTION STRATEGIES
159
Figure 15.2.
Limit order execution.
where µ is the instantaneous drift and σ is the standard deviation, both
per unit time. In the context of a purchase problem, pt is best thought of
as the best (lowest) ask in the market. The buy limit price is denoted Lt.
If at time t, pt ≥Lt, then the agent has effectively submitted a marketable
limit order, which achieves immediate execution. A limit order priced at
Lt < pt will be executed during period t if pτ ≤Lt for any time t < τ < t + 1.
The situation is depicted in ﬁgure 15.2. A limit order priced at Lt executes
if the stock price follows path B but not path A. This is a standard problem
in stochastic processes, and many exact results are available.
The diffusion-barrier notion of execution is at best a ﬁrst approxima-
tion. In many markets, a buy limit order might be executed by a market
(or marketable) sell order while the best ask is still well above the limit
price. We will subsequently generalize the execution mechanism to allow
this. For the moment, though, it might be noted that the present situation
is not without precedent. In the U.S. NASDAQ market, prior to the adop-
tion of the Manning rules, a dealer holding a customer limit order was
only required to ﬁll the order when the opposing quote (the ask, in the
case of a buy order) met the limit price (see appendix A, section A.3).
Like the long-term problem, the present one may be formulated as a
dynamic programming exercise and solved via backward induction. The
value function is denoted Vt(pt) and corresponds to the expected purchase
price, that is, a cost to be minimized. If execution has not been achieved
by the start of period T, then the trader must purchase using a market
order. In this case, VT(pT) = pT. The ﬁrst substantive decisions occur if
no execution has been achieved by the start of period T −1. Should we
use a market or limit order? If a limit order, at what price?
In period T −1 if a limit order priced at LT−1 executes, the trader
purchases at LT−1; otherwise the problem continues into period T. Let
Pr(Lt hit|pt) denote the probability that a buy limit order priced at Lt


160
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
is hit in the coming period when the current ask is pt. Obviously,
Pr(Lt not hit|pt) = 1 −Pr(Lt hit|pt). E[pt+1|pt, Lt not hit] is the expecta-
tion of pt+1 conditional on the initial ask and the limit order priced at
Lt not being hit. Closed-form expressions for these functions are given
in the chapter appendix. With this notation the value function at time
T −1 is
VT−1( pT−1) = min
LT−1
E[LT−1 Pr (LT−1 hit|pT−1)
+ VT(pT) Pr (LT−1 not hit|pT−1)]
= min
LT−1
%
LT−1 Pr(LT−1 hit|pT−1)
+ E[pT|pT−1; LT−1 not hit]
× Pr (LT−1 not hit|pT−1)
&
.
(15.12)
If LT−1 = pT−1, the trader is essentially purchasing immediately with a
market order. As LT−1 drops (becoming less aggressive), both terms on the
right-hand side change as Pr (LT−1Hit|pT−1) and E[pT|pT−1; LT−1 not hit]
decline.2
An interesting result arises in the zero-drift case. If µ = 0,
pT−1 = E[pT|pT−1]
= E[pT|pT−1, LT−1 hit]Pr(LT−1 hit|pT−1)
+ E[pT|pT−1; LT−1 not hit] Pr (LT−1 not hit|pT−1)
= LT−1 Pr (LT−1 hit|pT−1) + E[pT|pT−1; LT−1 not hit]
× Pr (LT−1 not hit|pT−1).
(15.13)
The ﬁrst equality follows from the martingale property of a zero-drift
Weiner process; the second, from the deﬁnition of conditional expecta-
tions; and the third, from the fact that once a driftless random walk hits
a barrier, the expectation of its subsequent position is equal to the bar-
rier level (using the reﬂection principle; see Karlin and Taylor (1975),
pp. 345–52). By comparing (15.12) and (15.13), we see that the minimand
of the value function is simply pT−1. That is, there is no advantage to using
a limit order, and the trader might as well buy immediately, paying pT−1
with a market order. The objective function here is the expected cost, but
clearly using a limit order would result in a dispersion of outcomes. Thus
an agent who was only slightly risk-averse would prefer a market order to
a limit order. Perhaps not surprisingly, limit order usage in pre-Manning
NASDAQ was reputedly low. If µ > 0, then an immediate market order is
strictly optimal. If µ < 0, there is no interior optimum.


PROSPECTIVE TRADING COSTS AND EXECUTION STRATEGIES
161
15.2.2
Random Execution
A more interesting and realistic model results from combining the
diffusion-barrier model with an execution mechanism based on a random
unexpressed reservation price, similar to the device used in the single-
period order choice model (section 12.1). Speciﬁcally, suppose that at the
beginning and throughout period t there is a group of potential sellers
monitoring the market. Each seller has a unexpressed reservation price
differential, a threshold such that when the distance between the visible
ask and the buyer’s limit bid price drops to the threshold, she immediately
hits the limit bid. Let ct denote the maximum reservation differential over
the population of sellers over the interval. A limit buy priced at L executes
during interval t if pτ ≤L + ct for some τ, t ≤τ < t + 1. Thus, execution can
be viewed as the ﬁrst passage to a random barrier. For tractability we
assume that the ct are independently and identically distributed, and that
they are also independent of the price. (The independence assumptions
ensure that ct does not enter the problem as a state variable.)
The value function becomes
Vt(pt) = min
Lt
E


Lt Pr (Lt + ct ≥pt|pt)
+ Lt Pr (Lt + ct hit; Lt + ct > pt|pt)
+ Vt+1(pt+1) Pr (Lt + ct not hit;
Lt + ct > pt|pt)

.
(15.14)
The three terms in the brackets correspond to the possible outcomes of
immediate execution, execution during the interval, and no execution.
To develop the model further, it is useful to rework the problem so that
the value function is expressed relative to the current ask price. Deﬁne the
relative limit price as ℓt = Lt −pt (ℓt < 0 for a buy order). The cumulative
price change over the interval is δτ = pτ −pt for t ≤τ < t + 1. Execution
occurs if δτ hits (from above) a barrier located at ℓt + ct, and if ℓt + ct ≥0,
execution is immediate. Letting Pr(α hit) denote the probability that δτ hits
a barrier α < 0, equation (15.14) may be written:
Vt(pt) = pt + min
ℓt
E


ℓt Pr (ct ≥−ℓt)
+ ℓt Pr (ℓt + ct hit; ct < −ℓt)
+ (Vt+1(pt+1) −pt)
× Pr (ℓt + ct not hit; ct < −ℓt)

,
(15.15)
where the expectation is over price paths and ct. A relative value function
may be deﬁned as vt = Vt(pt) −pt. It does not depend on pt, and so has
the recursive structure:
vt = min
ℓt


ℓt Pr (ct ≥−ℓt)
+ ℓt Pr (ℓt + ct hit; ct < −ℓt)
+{vt+1 + E[δt+1|ℓt + ct not hit; ct < −ℓt]}
× Pr (ℓt + ct not hit; ct < −ℓt)

.
(15.16)


162
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
Figure 15.3.
Value functions for six-period purchase problem.
Letting f (c) denote the density function of ct,
vt = min
ℓt


ℓt
( ∞
−ℓt
f (c)dc + ℓt
( −ℓt
0
Pr(ℓt + c hit)f (c)dc
+
( −ℓt
0
Pr (ℓt + ct not hit)
×
)
vt+1 + E[δt+1|ℓt + ct not hit;
ct < −ℓt]
*
f (c)dc


.
(15.17)
If c is an exponential random variable with density f (ct) = λexp(−λct),
most of the integrals have closed-form representations.
As a numerical illustration, we consider the problem ﬁxing parameter
values at T = 6, µ = 0, σ = 1, and λ = 5. Figure 15.3 plots the value func-
tions for the ﬁrst ﬁve periods. (Recall that at T = 6, we have no choice
but to hit the ask.) For the parameter values chosen, the value functions
have global minima, which are marked with dots. The ﬁgure illustrates
several features of interest. First, as we move earlier in the problem, the
value function (expected purchase) declines for all choices of ℓt. This is
reasonable, in that when the horizon is effectively longer, there is a greater
chance that a limit order strategy will at some point succeed. Second, the
limit order price increases as we move closer to the terminal time. Thus,
within the framework of this model, we have demonstrated that it is an
optimal strategy to initially submit limit orders far away from the market
but making them more aggressive as the deadline approaches.
The next ﬁgure describes the effects of parameter changes on optimal
limit order placement. Panel A of ﬁgure 15.4 illustrates the dependence
on drift. With positive drift, the price is tending to move away from a buy
limit order. Thus, as drift increases, limit prices are more aggressive at


PROSPECTIVE TRADING COSTS AND EXECUTION STRATEGIES
163
Figure 15.4.
Dependence of limit order strategies on drift and volatility.
all times. Panel B depicts volatility dependence. As volatility increases,
the probability that a random walk will hit a given barrier increases.
Volatility therefore increases the chance of execution, and limit orders are
consequently priced less aggressively. The dependence of ℓt on the c dis-
tribution parameter λ is not depicted but is fairly intuitive. As λ increases,
the distribution becomes more concentrated toward zero. There are likely
to be fewer potential sellers with extreme values, and therefore the optimal
limit orders must be priced more aggressively to succeed.3
15.2.3
Empirical Analysis of Limit Order Execution
The barrier-diffusion model and the extension with random reservation
prices attempt to characterize the probability of execution over the deci-
sion interval. The length of the decision interval, though, is a property
of the application (the strategic problem), not an essential characteristic
of the limit order execution process. It is therefore more useful in prac-
tice to model a limit order’s time to execution using duration analysis.
Duration analysis seeks to characterize wall-clock times between events,
in this case, between the submission of a limit order and its execution.
The fundamentals of duration analysis are discussed in Lancaster (1997),
Greene (2002), and Allison (1995). Lo, McKinlay, and Zhang (2002) apply
these techniques to limit order executions.
The simplest duration speciﬁcation is the Poisson/exponential model
discussed in section 6.2. In the present context, it might arise as follows.
Let τ denote the execution duration, the time between the submission and
execution. In the case of a buy limit order, if it is alone at the best bid (i.e., it
is the only order) and if market sell orders arrive with Poisson intensity λ,
then τ is exponentially distributed with parameter λ.
The exponential model is the simplest duration speciﬁcation, but there
are many others. Among them is the diffusion-barrier model used here.
Lancaster (1997) discusses its characteristics as basis for duration model-
ing. One distinctive feature is particularly relevant. If the diffusion price
process has zero drift, then it will eventually (with probability one) hit


164
EMPIRICAL MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
any ﬁnite barrier. This implies that any limit order will eventually exe-
cute. This is also true of the exponential model (if λ > 0). In the diffusion
model with nonzero drift, however, this is not the case. For example, in a
limit buy situation with positive drift, there is a positive probability that
the limit order will never execute.4
The barrier-diffusion model should be relatively easy to apply because
the drift and volatility can be estimated directly from a sample of prices.
In their sample, however, Lo et al. ﬁnd that this model (which they call the
ﬁrst-passage time model) underestimates actual times to execution, that is,
that the model is too optimistic, and that a generalized gamma alternative
performs much better. Related work includes Challet and Stinchcombe
(2003).
An important consideration affecting most duration models is censor-
ing. This may involve observations at the start of the sample, for example,
limit orders that were already on the book at the start of a sample and
for which we have no record of the submission time. Censoring may also
involve observations removed from the sample before the duration event
occurred, for example, limit orders that are canceled. Econometrically,
censoring is easily dealt with as long as the censoring process is inde-
pendent of the duration being modeled. To illustrate the nature of the
dependence, consider a medical study of mortality subsequent to diagno-
sis, where patients might drop out of the study because they move away
and can no longer be followed by the investigator. The duration of a sub-
ject whose move results from a job transfer can reasonably be presumed
to have been censored independently of the mortality process. This is not
the case for a subject who moves to be closer to family because he is feeling
poorly.
Censoring is important in limit order analysis because the vast pre-
ponderance of limit orders are canceled. In their sample, for example,
Hasbrouck and Saar (2003) ﬁnd that only roughly 13% of submitted limit
orders are executed. The remainder are canceled, either explicitly or by
expiration at the end of the day. Although tractability might dictate assum-
ing otherwise, however, actual execution and cancellation processes are
likely to be strongly dependent. One need look no further than the optimal
strategies depicted in ﬁgure 15.3. Limit orders are canceled (and resub-
mitted with higher prices) when the price has moved away from the limit
order, that is, because the likelihood of execution has fallen.
Appendix
Lancaster (1997) discusses the Weiner process barrier model in depth.
The following are restatements of Lancaster’s results in terms of the
present problem. In what follows, the price is assumed to evolve as


PROSPECTIVE TRADING COSTS AND EXECUTION STRATEGIES
165
dpt = µdt + σdz. A limit buy order is presumed to be priced at L ≤pt.
The time interval is assumed to be one unit.
For a limit buy order priced at L,
Pr

Hit|pt, L

= 1 −
pt −L + µ
σ

+ exp
2µ(L −pt)
σ2

φ
L −pt + µ
σ

.
(15.18)
If the limit order is not hit, the density function for the end-of-period
price is:
f (pt+1|pt, L, No Hit)
=
−exp

−2µ(pt −L)
σ2

φ
µ + (L −pt) + (L −pt+1)
σ

+ φ
 µ −(pt+1 −pt)
σ

σ(1 −Pr (Hit|pt, L))
.
(15.19)
The corresponding expectation is:
E[pt+1|pt, L, No Hit]
= µ +
2(pt −L)exp
−2µ(pt −L)
σ2


µ −(pt −L)
σ

(1 −Pr (Hit|pt, L))
.
(15.20)
Additional results are developed in the Mathematica notebook associated
with this chapter.


Appendix: U.S. Equity Markets
This appendix is an overview of the organization and recent history
of U.S. equity trading. Many discussions of this material focus on the
institutions: “listed” trading and the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE);
and, “unlisted”/over-the-counter market (NASDAQ). These institutions
are still important, but they are not as central as they once were, nor are
they as well deﬁned. Accordingly, it is better to start from a functional
perspective that establishes the players and their relationships.
A.1
Functional Overview
The players in and components of U.S. equity markets may be summarized
as follows:
• The customers are individuals and institutions (pension funds,
mutual funds and other managed investment vehicles, collec-
tively known as the buy side). The distinction between retail and
institutional customers is mainly one of size, and should not be
construed as naive versus sophisticated. Furthermore, customers
often actively compete in the market-making process.
• Brokers act as agents for customer orders and often provide non-
trading services as well (such as advice and research). Brokers and
dealers are collectively known as the sell side.
• The market venues are simply places (real or virtual) where trades
occur. The principal venues are:
• The exchanges (also known as the listed market). Most
important, the NYSE, but also including the American Stock
166


APPENDIX: U.S. EQUITY MARKETS
167
Exchange, Cincinnati and the regional stock exchanges
(Philadelphia, Boston, Chicago, Paciﬁc).
• NASDAQ (the “unlisted” market).
• Alternative trading systems (ATSs) include electronic com-
munications networks (ECNs, e.g., Inet, Archipelago) and the
crossing networks. Most ECNs are constituted as electronic
limit order markets.
• The primary regulator of trading in U.S. equity markets is the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). In 1933, Congress
created the SEC and delegated to it primary authority. The SEC
has in turn delegated authority to industry entities known as
“Self-Regulatory Organizations” (SROs). The NYSE and National
Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) are the principal SROs.
Congressional mandates on security markets generally take the
form of broad directives that leave details up to the SEC, with the
notable recent exception of decimalization (discussed later).
• Market data systems consolidate and disseminate trade reports,
quotes, and so on.
• Intermarket linkage systems connect the trading venues and per-
mit one trading venue to send an order to another for purposes of
execution (“access”). As markets have become more fragmented,
these systems have become very important, arguably transcending
the importance of any single venue.
We now turn to a more detailed discussion of the components, beginning
with the most important and complex: the market venues.
A.2
The NYSE
Historically, the NYSE dominated U.S. equity trading. An economist
might describe it as a multiproduct ﬁrm, producing listing, regulatory, and
trading services. The present analysis focuses mainly on the NYSE’s trad-
ing activities.1 NYSE trading protocols are complex because the exchange
is a hybrid market that features an open outcry system, a dealer market,
and an electronic limit order book. These mechanisms are not simply run
in parallel isolation but are integrated in a fashion that attempts to balance
their needs and features. The amalgam of these systems is now designated
as the NYSE Hybrid Market (SM). It is perhaps easiest to approach these
diverse mechanisms and their interaction by reviewing them in the order
in which they arose historically.
A.2.1
The NYSE as an Open Outcry (Floor Market)
The NYSE was founded in 1792 and ﬁrst functioned as an open out-
cry market (section 2.2). Floor trading procedures reﬂect the following
principles.


168
APPENDIX: U.S. EQUITY MARKETS
• Price priority. As an illustration, someone who is bidding 101
should have priority over someone who’s bidding 100. Here, it
might be thought that self-interest of sellers would ensure price
priority: Why would anyone sell at 100 when they could sell
at 101? If the broker is acting as agent, he may care more about
getting a customer order ﬁlled quickly than getting the best price,
particularly if the customer can’t easily monitor the market. The
rule of price priority gives the other side (in this case, the bidder)
the right to protest (and break) the trade. A trade at 100 when a
buyer is bidding 101 is called a trade-through. The prevalence of
trade-throughs has recently reemerged as an important regulatory
concern (see section A.8).
• Time priority. First-come, ﬁrst-served is a time-honored principle
that rewards prompt action. In the present case, the ﬁrst member
to bid or offer at a price gets the ﬁrst trade at that price. Beyond
that, there is no time priority. In a crowd, it is relatively easy to
keep track of who was ﬁrst, but more difﬁcult to remember who
was second, third, and so on.
• Trade reporting. The practice of public last-sale reporting and dis-
semination of bids and offers date from the ﬂoor phase of the
NYSE’s history (and predates by many years the establishment
of any external regulation).
A.2.2
The Dealer (Specialist)
The dealer part of the picture emerged in the 1870s. According to legend,
a member broke his leg and while constrained by immobility decided to
specialize in certain selected stocks. The practice was adopted by more
ambulatory brokers, and the specialist system was born.
A specialist trades on his own account and is not an employ of the
exchange. Specialists were originally small proprietorships, but recent
consolidations have left only seven specialist units, some of which are
subsidiaries of other ﬁnancial ﬁrms. There is currently one specialist per
stock. This has given rise to the expression monopolistic specialist. The
specialist does enjoy some market power, but the qualiﬁer greatly exagge-
rates its extent. The specialist participation rate (specialist purchases +
specialist sales)/(2 × total volume) is about 15%.
The specialist’s primary responsibility is to maintain a fair and orderly
market. There a large number of rules that specify what the specialist
should do (afﬁrmative obligations) and what he should avoid (negative
obligations). Among the specialist’s afﬁrmative obligations are duties to:
• Make a market, that is, bid and offer on his own account when
necessary. The specialist has the sole authority and responsibility
for the quotes.
• Act as agent for the limit order book and market orders. The spe-
cialist’s role as agent for public orders became more prominent


APPENDIX: U.S. EQUITY MARKETS
169
with the prevalence of electronic delivery. The exchanges order
delivery and routing systems (notably SuperDOT) send virtually
all orders that don’t require a broker’s human attention to the
specialist’s workstation (DisplayBook).
• Maintain price continuity, that is, ensure that successive price
variations are small.
Among the negative obligations, the specialist is:
• Prohibited from trading ahead of a public customer at the same
price (e.g., buying at 100 when a customer is bidding 100).
• Discouraged from “trading in a destabilizing fashion” (buying on
an uptick or selling on a downtick).
A.2.3
The Limit Order Book
The book is maintained by the specialist. In ﬂoor trading protocols, the
specialist acting as agent for the book is essentially considered a single
ﬂoor trader. One implication of this is that although price/time priority
is strictly observed within the book, the book as a single entity might not
have priority over ﬂoor traders who arrived considerably after the limit
orders in the book were posted.
A.2.4
The Bid and Ask Quotes
The specialist sets the bid and ask quotes. In doing so, he might be rep-
resenting his own interest, orders on the book, bids or offers that a ﬂoor
broker might want displayed, or a combination of all of these. If there are
orders on the book at the bid or ask, they must be represented (under the
SEC’s Quote Display Rule), but the display is not automatic. Historically,
the specialist could exercise considerable discretion in the display of cus-
tomer limit orders. Presently, limit orders that better the existing quote
must be executed or displayed within 30 seconds.
A.2.5
Executions
The NYSE has historically aggressively adopted technology to transmit
orders and information but has been disinclined to automate the execu-
tion of orders. This reluctance has been justiﬁed by the necessity of human
(specialist) judgment in the maintenance of a fair and orderly market. In
response to competitive pressure and a customer clientele that placed a
premium on speed of execution, however, the NYSE began to offer auto-
matic execution. The NYSE Direct+ system came online in 2000 and was
quickly judged a success. It has since been reﬁned, and is now an integral
part of NYSE trading.


170
APPENDIX: U.S. EQUITY MARKETS
Non-Direct+ market orders are delivered to the specialist’s post and
do not execute automatically. Acting as agent for the order, the specialist
effectively auctions it off. The order may execute against an order on the
book, against an order represented by a ﬂoor broker. The specialist may
also act as counterparty himself.
Large executions (block trades) have traditionally had a size threshold
of 10,000 shares, but nowadays many orders of that size would simply
be allowed to follow the electronic route of small orders, as described.
The terms of large orders are usually negotiated by customers and their
brokers. Often the process involves the broker guaranteeing the customer
a price and then working the order (feeding it to the market) slowly over
time to minimize price impact. The general process is the same whether
the stock is listed on an exchange or NASDAQ. (See following discussion.)
When a broker has located both a buyer and seller for a block, he may,
under certain circumstances, “cross” the block, that is, execute the trade
without other buyers and sellers stepping in to take part or all of one or
both sides (the “clean-cross rule”). Many markets (including the Euronext
markets) have similar arrangements.
A.2.6
Opening and Closing Procedures
The opening procedure is effectively a single-price call auction. Brokers
submit customer orders. The specialist tries to ﬁnd a single price at which
supply equals demand. To maintain a fair and orderly market, and in
accordance with various other rules, the specialist may buy or sell at the
open. A common scenario is one in which the specialist buys or sells a
relatively small amount to resolve a minor buy-sell imbalance and clear
the book at the opening price.
The closing procedure is sometimes described as an auction. Like any
double-sided clearing, it balances expressed supply and demand, but
beyond this, it bears little resemblance to any other auction procedure.
The specialist is not relieved of responsibility for price continuity, which
implies that he must not only balance static supply and demand but also
establish a transition path to the closing price. The rules regarding entry
and cancellation of orders to be executed “at the close” are complex in
their speciﬁcs, but are generally aimed at early detection of imbalances.
By way of contrast, the closing auction procedure in the Euronext markets
involves cessation of continuous trading, followed by a ﬁve-minute win-
dow to enter orders, and a single-price clearing that is essentially identical
to the opening mechanism.
A.2.7
Governance and Alliance
In April 2003, it was disclosed that the NYSE was investigating ﬁve
of its seven specialist ﬁrms for violations of its trading rules. The SEC


APPENDIX: U.S. EQUITY MARKETS
171
also initiated an investigation. The SEC’s investigation lasted into 2005
and resulted in penalties being assessed not only against the specialists
but also against the exchange itself for failing to adequately police their
activities.
At the same time the specialist investigations were unfolding, the NYSE
suffered a governance crisis. The exchange was (and still is, at present)
organized as a not-for-proﬁt corporation, largely governed by its mem-
bers. This simple statement, however, fails to convey the extent of the
members’ divergence of interests and the consequent factions, coalitions,
and politicking that achieved the consensus necessary for operation. The
exchange’s trading practices were clearly subject to external review and
oversight, but the internal governance was much more opaque (certainly
in comparison with the practices it mandated for its listed companies). In
late summer 2003, public revelation of its CEO’s compensation arrange-
ments triggered internal dissent and attracted unprecedented external
criticism. The NYSE reorganized its governance procedures, and by the
end of the year had installed as a new CEO John Thain, a strong proponent
of automation.
In 2004 Thain proposed two connected initiatives. The ﬁrst was demu-
tualization of the exchange, conversion into a for-proﬁt corporation with
the members as the initial shareholders. Demutualization had been accom-
plished by other exchanges, had earlier been considered by the NYSE,
and was not a surprising suggestion. The second initiative, however, was
more unexpected. This was a proposed merger between the NYSE and
Archipelago, which operated a successful ECN. Both goals were accom-
plished. A parent corporation (the NYSE Group) operates the NYSE and
Archipelago (now known as NYSE Arca). NYSE Group is a publicly traded
corporation (under the ticker symbol NYX). The NYSE Group has recently
proposed merger with Euronext.
As profound as the NYSE’s changes were (and continue to be), however,
the forces of transformation hit earlier and more powerfully at the other
major U.S. equity market, NASDAQ.
A.3
NASDAQ
Historically, NASDAQ was primarily a dealer market with geographically
dispersed dealers linked by electronic systems that displayed bid and ask
quotes and last sale prices (Smith, Selway, and McCormick 1998). As
of 1990, NASDAQ was distinctly a dealer market (see section 2.3). It was
transformed in the 1990s by economic, political, and regulatory pressures.
The changes greatly enhanced customer protection and reduced the power
and proﬁtability of NASDAQ members (brokers and dealers). The changes
also weakened the authority and reach of NASDAQ as a central market
operator. They unfolded in the following steps.


172
APPENDIX: U.S. EQUITY MARKETS
A.3.1
The Manning Rules
NASDAQ (like most dealer markets) traditionally gave little protection to
customer limit orders. For example, supposing that the best market quotes
were 100 bid, offered at 102, a NASDAQ dealer who received a customer
limit order to buy at 101 did not have to display the order as a new, more
aggressive quote. The dealer could furthermore buy for his own account at
prices below 101 (thus trading through the customer order). The customer
was only entitled to an execution when the market offer price dropped to
101 (essentially making the customer order marketable). The Manning
rules were adopted in 1994 and 1995 by NASD to prohibit brokers from
trading ahead of or through their customer limit orders.
A.3.2
The Collusion Charges
In 1994, a Vanderbilt University academic study revealed an interesting
regularity. Christie and Schultz (1994) found that despite the 1/8 ($0.125)
tick size used at the time in U.S. equity markets, NASDAQ dealers tended
to bid and offer on a 1/4-point grid. They suggested that this might be a
coordination device to maintain spreads at 1/4. This would be proﬁtable
for dealers because most retail trades occurred at the bid or and the ask.
Furthermore with weak limit order protection (pre-Manning), there was
little opportunity for customers to use limit orders to compete with dealer
quotes.
Christie, Harris, and Schultz (1994) describe the aftermath. They had
sought comments from industry participants, and, after the ﬁndings
were peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, Vanderbilt issued a
press release on May 24, 1994. Also on May 24, a meeting of major
NASDAQ dealers was convened at the ofﬁces of Bear Sterns in New
York. At this meeting, a NASD ofﬁcial encouraged dealers to reduce their
spreads. The stated reason for this exhortation was an earlier rule change
(January 1994) to a NASDAQ automatic execution system (SOES), not
the Christie-Schultz study. Whatever the motivation, on May 27, spreads
began to drop dramatically.
NASDAQ authorized an external review of the matter (the Rudman
Commission); the SEC and the Department of Justice (DOJ) opened inves-
tigations; and civil lawsuits were ﬁled against the NASDAQ dealers (on
behalf of customers). In the sequel:
• The Rudman Commission examined NASD’s governance and
recommended that market operation and market regulation be sep-
arated. The latter was spun off as NASD. The separation was (and
is) structurally complex and is now enmeshed with NASDAQ’s
demutualization.
• The SEC and DOJ investigations were concluded and settled. The
investigatory report (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
1996b) describes the commission’s ﬁndings.


APPENDIX: U.S. EQUITY MARKETS
173
• The civil law suits were consolidated and eventually settled in
May 1999 for slightly under $1 billion.
A.3.3
The SEC’s Rule on Order Execution Obligations
The SEC and DOJ investigations served to support constructive reform
going forward. The most striking examples of this are rules 11Ac1-1 and
11Ac1-4 (now designated rules 602 and 604) on Order Execution Obliga-
tions. The extent of these rules was not limited to NASDAQ; they applied
to all markets. They are most clearly understood, however, in the context
of NASDAQ regulation. There are two components, the Display Rule and
the Quote Rule. As stated in the ﬁnal rule release (U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (1996)):
[The Display Rule] require[s] the display of customer limit orders
priced better than a specialist’s or over-the-counter (“OTC”) market
maker’s quote or that add to the size associated with such quote. . . .
[The Quote Rule] require[s] a market maker to publish quotations
for any listed security . . . and to make publicly available any supe-
rior prices that a market maker privately quotes through certain
electronic communications networks (“ECNs”). (page 1)
The Display Rule strengthened NASDAQ customer limit orders beyond
the protections afforded by Manning. When display is required, a cus-
tomer limit order can become the best bid or offer in the market. The Quote
Rule was designed to curb a practice whereby NASDAQ dealers would set
wide quotes that were visible to the public, but narrow quotes in the inter-
dealer and institutional markets that were not visible to the public. This
practice remains common in many other dealer markets (including foreign
exchange and bonds).
A.3.4
SuperMontage
NASDAQ is largely deﬁned by its information systems. The modern
NASDAQ essentially came into being with the 1971 initiation of the quote
montage system, which allowed for screen display of dealer quotes. Sub-
sequently added systems allowed for trade reporting and conﬁrmation
(ACT), interdealer communication of trading commitments (SelectNet),
small retail order execution (SOES), and so on.
At present, most of the functionality in these disparate systems is now
consolidated in one system, SuperMontage. Conceptually, SuperMontage
comes closest to resembling an electronic limit order book for dealers.
That is, the display and trading protocols are similar to what would be
found in an electronic limit order book, except that customers are not
permitted direct access to the system. The system was designed to facili-
tate established NASDAQ practices like preferencing, and as a result the
actual trading protocols are quite complex.


174
APPENDIX: U.S. EQUITY MARKETS
A.3.5
Governance and Alliances
Like the NYSE, NASDAQ entered the 1990s as a not-for-proﬁt cor-
poration owned by its members. When NASDAQ (the market operation)
was divorced from NASD (the regulatory arm), it also entered onto a path
of demutualization (conversion into a stockholder-owned for-proﬁt cor-
poration), a process that is still in progress. En route, NASDAQ sold equity
stakes to outside investment groups.
Although ultimately winding up in a similar stance, NASDAQ’s
alliances over the past 10 years have been more numerous and more varied
than the NYSE’s. In 1998 NASDAQ announced that it would purchase the
American Stock Exchange (Amex). The proffered strategic rationale was
that a combination would be able to provide a broad array of dealer and
exchange markets in stocks and derivatives. The two units were never inte-
grated, however, and in 2003, Amex was sold. NASDAQ also established
a link with Optimark (an innovative electronic market), but for rea-
sons unrelated to the connection Optimark was not successful. NASDAQ
recently acquired the INET (formerly Island/Instinet) and Brut ECNs.
A.4
The New Trading Systems
With the advent of communications and Internet technology in the
1990s, there arose considerable interest in devising new electronic trading
mechanisms.2 The general structure of U.S. regulation, however, was not
well suited to dealing with these developments. For regulatory purposes,
the principal trading institution was the national securities exchange. As
this term was deﬁned in narrow terms, the new entrants did not obvi-
ously belong in that category (or any other). It was also widely recognized
that classiﬁcation as an exchange brought with it considerable regulatory
overhead.
The SEC initially accommodated the many new systems with “No
Action” letters that provisionally authorized operation. But it soon
became clear that a more consistent and cohesive regulatory structure
was called for. The SEC’s rule on the Regulation of Exchanges and Alter-
native Trading Systems (Regulation ATS) established a new framework.
As described in the executive summary to the ﬁnal rules (U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission (1998)), the key provision was,
To allow new markets to start, without disproportionate burdens,
a system with less than ﬁve percent of the trading volume in all
securities it trades is required only to: (1) ﬁle with the Commission
a notice of operation and quarterly reports; (2) maintain records,
including an audit trail of transactions; and (3) refrain from using
the words “exchange,” “stock market,” or similar terms in its name.
(Section II.c)


APPENDIX: U.S. EQUITY MARKETS
175
Although there is considerable overlap between the ECN and ATS cate-
gories, many ATSs do not display orders and are therefore not considered
ECNs. Examples include most crossing markets (section 2.6). The rule
successfully provided regulatory latitude during an unusually active time
in trading system development.
A.5
Decimalization
By the 1990s, most of the world’s ﬁnancial exchanges used prices quoted
in regular (decimal) form. U.S. equity trading, however, was still being
conducted in eighths (of a dollar). Although this might have been viewed
as an annoying anachronism, the NASDAQ collusion investigations gave
prominence to the possibility that a market’s tick size might have a large
effect on trading costs. To take the simplistic view, if the bid and ask
are set by insiders, and outside customers can trade only at these prices,
insiders would seek to keep spreads wide. The tick size sets a ﬂoor on how
narrow the spreads can become. It was conjectured that if the tick size were
mandated to be smaller, spreads would fall to the cost of providing dealer
services.
Positioned as a populist issue, the outcome of the debate was in little
doubt. Congress passed the Common Cents (cf. “sense”) Pricing Act of
1997. The NYSE switched to sixteenths and then, as required by the law,
to pennies. Spreads for most stocks declined (Stoll and Schenzler (2002)).
Thus, decimalization is clearly viewed as having been beneﬁcial to retail
customers. The effects on institutional trading costs and practices, how-
ever, have been less clear (Goldstein and Kavajecz (2000); Werner (2003)).
A.6
The Consolidation and Fragmentation Debate
Consolidation or centralization brings all trading interest together in one
place, thereby lessening the need for intermediaries. As a regulatory prin-
ciple, however, it favors the establishment and perpetuation of a single
trading venue, which may discourage innovation. Allowing new entrants
(like the ATSs) fosters competition among trading venues, but at any
given time the trading interest in a security is likely to be dispersed
(fragmented) among the venues, leading to increased intermediation and
price discrepancies among markets. The growing role of ATSs, increasing
competition among market venues, and the experience of the NASDAQ
reforms brought these tensions to the fore.
A public debate was occasioned by the call for the repeal of the NYSE’s
Rule 390. This rule embodied the principle that NYSE members were pro-
hibited from conducting trades off the ﬂoor of the exchange. At one time,


176
APPENDIX: U.S. EQUITY MARKETS
the rule had great force and reach, but by the 1990s it had been weakened
considerably. It nevertheless stood as strong symbol of the exchange’s anti-
competitive power. The relationship of the NYSE (as the self-regulatory
organization) and the SEC (as the ﬁnal authority on approval of rules)
required the NYSE to propose the rule change to the SEC. The SEC then
solicited comment on the proposal and ﬁnally took action (modiﬁcation
and approval, in this case).
In soliciting comment, the SEC took the occasion to raise broader
issues. In the “Rule 390 Concept Release” (U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (2000)), the SEC laid out terms of the debate and raised the
relevant policy questions. At about the same time, the U.S. Senate Banking
Committee conducted hearings in New York on the Competitive Market
Supervision Act (on February 28, 2000) and on the Financial Marketplace
of the Future (February 29, 2000). Referred to as the “World Trade Center
hearings,” these meetings are noteworthy because for a brief moment it
appeared that there was an emerging consensus in favor of a consoli-
dated limit order book (CLOB). For reasons possibly having to do with
uncertainties over how such a system might affect institutions’ competi-
tive positions, however, the momentum suddenly abated. Not since then
has a CLOB been seriously considered as the sole mechanism for U.S.
equities trading.
A.7
Access and Intermarket Linkage Systems
Accessing a market generally refers to a constructive interaction with the
market, particularly the transmission of a marketable (immediately exe-
cutable) order to the venue. An access system is therefore more powerful
than a market data system, which only offers a view of the trading activity.
Broad access facilitates competition among venues, and can so promote
virtual consolidation of a fragmented market.
For a broker to have direct access to a trading venue, it has usually been
necessary for the broker to be a member (if the venue is an exchange) or
a subscriber (if the venue is an ECN). A broker will usually be linked to
most if not all trading venues, thereby providing maximum ﬂexibility in
routing a customer order.
Other links connect the trading venues directly. The most venerable of
these is the Intermarket Trading System (ITS). ITS links the NYSE and the
regional stock exchanges. It allows brokers at one exchange to send orders
directly to another. NASDAQ’s SuperSOES system also provides access
(among other things). It can automatically generate executions between
different market makers, between a broker and a market maker, or even
between a broker and an ECN.
Intermarket access systems became ﬂash points for intervenue
disputes. A major point of difference arose from the relative speeds of


APPENDIX: U.S. EQUITY MARKETS
177
electronic and ﬂoor-based venues. To avoid trade-throughs, the former
may be forced to send orders to the latter at a penalty in response time that
some traders felt is substantial. The problem has been largely addressed,
however, with the order protection rule component of Regulation National
Market System (NMS), to which we next turn.
A.8
Regulation NMS
After the rescission of NYSE Rule 390, the SEC next addressed
the balance between consolidation and fragmentation in fall 2003.
Following extensive internal discussion, on February 26, 2004, the SEC
released for public comment a group of proposed rules collectively named
“Regulation NMS” (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2004a)).3
The proposed rule was extensive in scope and attracted an exceedingly
large number of comments. The SEC held public meetings, modiﬁed the
rule, and reproposed it, allowing for another comment period. Following
more heated debate, the ﬁnal rule was adopted in June 2005 (U.S. Secu-
rities and Exchange Commission (2005)), but only over the strong dissent
of two commissioners (Glassman and Atkins (2005)).
Regulation NMS has ﬁve parts:
1. The order protection rule: Market centers are responsible for tak-
ing steps to prevent the occurrence of trade-throughs. (This rule is
sometimes described, incorrectly, as trade-through prohibition.)
2. The access rule: Markets must allow nonsubscribers (outsiders)
to submit executable orders on the same terms as their sub-
scribers. The rule also capped the fee that can be charged for
this access.
3. The subpenny rule: Stocks trading above $1 cannot be quoted in
increments smaller than 1 cent.
4. Revised market data rules that deﬁne how market data revenues
are to be allocated to trading centers.
5. Reorganization of rules (“to promote greater clarity and under-
standing”).
The ﬁrst four of these are substantive. The ﬁfth was a useful updating, and
attracted no comments (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2005),
p. 283). The rules apply to diverse aspects of market operation but share
a common purpose, namely, promoting the efﬁciency of a market that is
fundamentally fragmented. The rules deﬁne, for the moment at least, the
limits to which a single trading venue can wall off its operations from the
rest of the market.
The order protection rule had the most interesting evolution and
engendered the most heated discussion. Trade-throughs were generally
acknowledged to be indicative of a poorly integrated market, but some


178
APPENDIX: U.S. EQUITY MARKETS
doubted their frequency, magnitude, and economic signiﬁcance, and
therefore the need for regulation. One view was that the broker’s agency
duty already covered the matter, for example, that a broker who executed
a customer market purchase order at 100 when there was an available
offer at 99 was not giving his client “best execution.” The Commission
was also ultimately concerned, however, with the order traded through
(in this example, the offer at 99). It was felt that trade-throughs would
discourage the submission of visible limit orders and therefore that the
competition to establish aggressive bids and offers would be impaired.
It was noted earlier that existing market linkage systems had difﬁculties
with the differing degrees to which participants valued response speed.
Trade-through avoidance may require a venue to send an order elsewhere.
If the destination venue delays responding to the order, the market might
grind to halt, with all participants being forced to wait for the slowest
respondent. The Commission’s solution was to make a venue’s best bid
and offer protected against trade through only if they were available for
automatic execution. This effectively requires venues to establish rapid
and reliable links.
The access rule prevents venues from establishing differential terms
on which they handle subscriber and nonsubscriber orders. The cap on
access fees avoids the distortion that might result if execution costs were
net of access fees, but the quoted bids and offers did not include these
fees. In setting a lower limit on the price increment, the SEC essentially
decreed that markets should not compete on the tick-size dimension.4
The market data rule is complex in its particulars but is broadly
intended to reward a venue for the informational value of the data it pro-
vides. In trade reporting, the formula is weighted to reward both trade
frequency and trade volume. The part of the rule dealing with quotes,
though, represents a more signiﬁcant innovation. Under the rule, mar-
kets are rewarded for matching the best visible bids and offers and also
for improving on these prices. The rule marked a step forward from pre-
existing allocational practices that were unrelated to informational value
at best and distortionary at worst.
Overall, Regulation NMS represents a signiﬁcant evolutionary step in
regulators’ attempts to address market failures that might result in higher
costs to traders or impairment of the informational value of prices in a
hybrid market.


Notes
Notes to Chapter 2
1. Historically, limit order books were usually maintained on paper or chalk-
board. The descriptor electronic differentiates the modern form of these books. It
is increasingly being dropped because it has become superﬂuous: “Electronic limit
order book” has gone the way of “electronic computer.”
2. A similar situation recently occurred on the Tokyo Stock Exchange. “During
the initial public offering of J-Com, . . . an employee at Mizuho, a subsidiary of
the Mizuho Financial Group, mistakenly typed an order to sell 610,000 shares at
1 yen, or less than a penny each, instead of an order to sell one share at 610,000 yen
($5,057) as intended, the brokerage said” (Fackler (2005)). The chair of the Tokyo
Stock Exchange resigned in the aftermath (Morse (2005)).
3. At one point there were over 100 U.S. regional stock exchanges (U.S. Secu-
rities and Exchange Commission (1963), p. 948). Arnold et al. (1999) state that
by 1940, there were eighteen, and this number dropped to seven by 1980 (mainly
through mergers). Recent closures of trading ﬂoors include the Vancouver Stock
Exchange (1989), the Toronto Stock Exchange (1997), the Tokyo Stock Exchange
(1999), and the equity ﬂoor of the Paciﬁc Stock Exchange (2001). There have been
few (if any) start-ups of ﬂoor-based exchanges.
4. For example, suppose that the lowest price in all the bilateral deals is $10. If
there exists someone who wanted to buy (but didn’t) at a price above $10, or sell
(but didn’t) at a price below $10, then the total trade surplus is not maximized.
5. In Securities and Exchange Commission v. Moises Saba Masri, et al., the
SEC alleged that the defendants entered large buy orders near the close in a stock
on which they had written a large number of (uncovered) put options and that by
artiﬁcially boosting the price of the stock they could prevent exercise of the options
(U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2004b)). In SEC v. Rhino Advisors, Inc.
and Thomas Badian, the SEC charged that the defendants had sold short a stock
in attempt to depress the price, in an attempt to increase the number of shares
they would obtain under the terms of a conversion (U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (2003)).
6. An order surcharge that increased as time to the next scheduled clearing
declined was used by Wunsch Auction Systems (subsequently the Arizona Stock
Exchange, now defunct), an alternative trading system for U.S. equities.
179


180
NOTES
7. Under regulatory pressure, in 1991 U.S. Treasury security dealers began to
publish bids, offers, and trade prices in the interdealer market on the GovPX system.
The success of the GovPX initiative was later used to support the implementation of
the TRACE (Trade Reporting And Compliance Engine) for municipal and corporate
debt securities (Levitt (1999)).
Note to Chapter 4
1. Cos(t) in this formulation is a deterministic component of the series. Such
components can also arise from time trends (linear or otherwise). When the deter-
ministic component is periodic (like Cos(t)), it is said to be seasonal. Although the
term originated in descriptions of monthly and quarterly patterns, it is now used to
describe recurrent patterns at any frequency. Financial market data, for example,
are said to exhibit intraday seasonalities: Trading volumes and return volatilities
tend to be elevated at the start and end of trading sessions.
Note to Chapter 5
1. These remarks presume that trading has no ultimate impact on the real cash
ﬂows of the security. One possible mechanism that might lead to an interaction (at
least, in the case of equity) would result from a purchaser who intends to managerial
control over the enterprise. Alternatively, a seller (or more likely, a short seller) who
succeeds in temporarily driving the price down may thereby cause the ﬁrm to lose
customers who take the stock price as a signal of the ﬁrm’s long-term viability.
Note to Chapter 6
1. Speciﬁcally, because the basic model does not allow for nonevent days, α = 1.
Next note that µ functions differently in the two models. In the basic model, it is
simply the probability that a trader is informed: µ(in the simple model) = PIN. In
the present model, though, µ is an expected arrival rate (informed traders per unit
time). To obtain PIN (a probability per trade), it must be normalized by the arrival
rate of all trades (the denominator in PIN). Alternatively, if we scaled the time unit
in the arrival rates so that the total arrival rate was unity, then µ (rescaled to this
time unit) would equal PIN.
Note to Chapter 9
1. Lee and Ready (1991) assess the merits of quote comparison and tick test
procedures. Among other things, they suggest that in working with NYSE data,
trade prices be compared to midpoints prevailing ﬁve seconds previous (based on
reported times). There have been many improvements in the reporting procedures
however, and in more recent data signing based on reported times (with no lag)
is likely to be more accurate (Bessembinder (2003a); Piwowar and Wei (2006)).
Odders-White (2000) compares the trade signs imputed from quote data with the
directions of the actual underlying orders.


NOTES
181
Note to Chapter 10
1. The mere fact that no convergent representation exists does not preclude
computation of sample estimates. Unlike, for example, the case of perfect collinear-
ity in a set of regressors, there is no obvious computational problem.
Note to Chapter 11
1. The details are as follows. The characteristic function of a random variable
X is deﬁned as φ(t) = EeiXt where i = √−1. If X ∼N(µ, σ2), then φ(t) = eiµt−σ 2t2/2.
Letting t = iρ yields Ee−ρX = e−µρ+σ 2ρ2/2. The coefﬁcient of absolute risk aversion is
deﬁned for a general utility function as −U′′/U′. For the exponential utility function
−U′′/U′ = ρ.
Note to Chapter 12
1. This strategy, called lurking, may be very effective. Rust, Miller, and Palmer
(1993) describe a tournament of automated double-auction algorithms in which a
lurking strategy was the winner.
Notes to Chapter 15
1. It might be claimed that the permanent/transitory distinction is essentially
a semantic one, for example, that a transitory impact that remains for a month is
effectively permanent from the perspective of a purchase program that will exe-
cuted over one day. The relevant horizon, however, is not the trading period but
the holding period. Suppose the purchase pushes up the security price by $1. If
the increase is truly permanent, the dollar will be realized (in cash) when the secu-
rity is subsequently sold. If the price reverts before the sale, however, the position
incurs a $1 loss. Viewing long-term (but ultimately transient) impacts as permanent
causes trading costs to appear smaller than they actually are.
2. In practice, a trader might price a limit order above the current ask (L > pt)
if she thought that that the ask might move before her order could be conveyed to
the market and executed. Petersen and Sirri (2002) discuss such orders.
3. The model used in this section is cast in the framework of Harris (1998),
with the following essential differences. Harris permits only discrete limit prices.
(Prior to penny pricing in the U.S. equity markets, the tick size, generally $0.125,
was large relative to short-term price volatility.) Harris also assumes a different
execution mechanism, based on the beta distribution. Finally, Harris considers
alternative trading objectives.
4. Most of the distributions commonly used in duration analysis imply eventual
execution. The reader/trader is cautioned against relying on these models beyond
the durations found in the estimation sample.
Notes to Appendix
1. Hasbrouck, Soﬁanos, and Sosebee (1993) and Teweles and Bradley (1998)
give basic background on the NYSE, but neither source is current. The NYSE


182
NOTES
Constitution and Rules (New York Stock Exchange (2005)) is authoritative and
complete in the details, but it is difﬁcult to distill from this document an overall
picture of how the market really functions. The clearest description of NYSE pro-
cedures I have encountered is the exchange’s Floor Ofﬁcial Manual. This manual
is a complete and well-organized account, but is not circulated externally.
2. The question of which was the ﬁrst electronic stock exchange has no clear
answer. One strong contender, though, is Instinet. Instinet began operation in 1979
as an electronic limit order book for institutions (mutual funds, pension funds, etc.).
Instinet’s growth accelerated when it began to allow participation by NASDAQ
market makers. The NASDAQ market makers used the system essentially as their
interdealer market, and this clientele became a substantial, perhaps the dominant,
group of Instinet participants. Signiﬁcantly, Instinet did not open itself to retail
traders. This proved to be a forgone opportunity, as newer entrants successfully
cultivated the retail business.
3. In the 1975 Securities Act, Congress directed the SEC to foster a “national
market system” (NMS). The phrase has probably occasioned more commentary
than any other expression in U.S. market regulation. It has been interpreted at one
extreme as suggesting a sort of loose communication among trading venues, and at
the other extreme as a clear charge for a CLOB. The inclusion of the expression in the
title of the proposed rule is signiﬁcant, though, because it prominently asserts the
rationale for the rules in a way that connects them to speciﬁc authorizing legislation.
4. Although not cited in the Commission’s discussion, one example may illus-
trate the need for such a rule. ESpeed, an electronic trading system for U.S. Treasury
bonds, had offered its users the ability (by paying a higher commission) to slightly
improve on visible bids and offers, thereby gaining priority over them. The feature
engendered some ill will, however, and ESpeed decided to abandon the feature in
January 2005 (Lucchetti (2005)).


References
Acharya, Viral V., and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2002, Asset pricing with
liquidity risk (Stern School of Business).
Admati, Anat, 1985, A noisy rational expectations equilibrium for multi-
asset securities markets, Econometrica 53, 629–57.
Admati, Anat, and Paul Pﬂeiderer, 1988, A theory of intraday trading
patterns: Volume and price variability, Review of Financial Studies 1,
3–40.
Alexander, Carol, 2001, Market Models: A Guide to Financial Data
Analysis (John Wiley West Sussex, UK).
Allison, Paul D., 1995, Survival Analysis Using the SAS System: A
Practical Guide (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).
Almgren, Robert, 2003, Optimal execution with nonlinear impact func-
tions and trading-enhanced risk, Applied Mathematical Finance 10,
1–18.
Almgren, Robert, and Neil Chriss, 2000, Optimal execution of portfolio
transactions, Risk 3, 5–39.
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and
time-series effects, Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1980, Dealership markets: Market-
making with inventory, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 31–53.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1987, Trading mechanisms
and stock returns: An empirical investigation, Journal of Finance 42,
533–53.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1991. Market microstructure and
price discovery on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, in William T. Ziemba,
Warren Bailley, and Yasushi Hamao, eds., Japanese Financial
Market Research, Contributions to Economic Analysis, no. 205
(North Holland, Amsterdam).
Amihud, Yakov, Haim Mendelson, and Maurizio Murgia, 1990, Stock
market microstructure and return volatility: Evidence from Italy,
Journal of Banking and Finance 14, 423–40.
Amihud, Yakov, Haim Mendelson, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2005,
Market microstructure and asset pricing (Stern School, New York
University).
183


184
REFERENCES
Angel, James J., 1994, Limit versus market orders (School of Business
Administration, Georgetown University).
Ansley, Craig F., W. Allen Spivey, and William J. Wrobleski, 1977, On
the structure of moving average prices, Journal of Econometrics 6,
121–34.
Arnold, Tom, Philip Hersch, J. Harold Mulherin, and Jeffry Netter, 1999,
Merging markets, Journal of Finance 54, 1083–107.
Bacidore, Jeffrey M., 1997, The impact of decimalization on market
quality: An empirical investigation of the Toronto Stock Exchange,
Journal of Financial Intermediation 6, 92–120.
Bacidore, Jeffrey M., 2002, Depth improvement and adjusted price
improvement on the New York stock exchange, Journal of Financial
Markets 5, 169–95.
Bacidore, Jeffrey, Katharine Ross, and George Soﬁanos, 2003, Quantify-
ing market order execution quality at the New York Stock Exchange,
Journal of Financial Markets 6, 281.
Back, Kerry, 1992, Insider trading in continuous time, Review of Financial
Studies 5.
Back, Kerry, and Shmuel Baruch, 2004, Information in securities markets:
Kyle meets Glosten and Milgrom, Econometrica 72, 433–65.
Back, Kerry, C. Henry Cao, and Gregory A. Willard, 2000, Imperfect
competition among informed traders, Journal of Finance 55, 2117–55.
Baillie, Richard T., G. Geoffrey Booth, Yiuman Tse, and Tatyana Zabotina,
2002, Price discovery and common factor models, Journal of Finan-
cial Markets 5, 309–22.
Barclay, Michael J., and Jerold B. Warner, 1993, Stealth trading and volatil-
ity: Which trades move prices?, Journal of Financial Economics 34,
281–305.
Battalio, Robert H., 1997a, Do competing specialists and preferenc-
ing dealers affect market quality?, Review of Financial Studies 10,
969–93.
Battalio, Robert H., 1997b, Third market broker-dealers: Cost competitors
or cream skimmers?, Journal of Finance 52, 341–52.
Battalio, Robert H., 1998, Order ﬂow distribution, bid-ask spreads, and
liquidity costs: Merrill Lynch’s decision to cease routinely routing
orders to regional stock exchanges, Journal of Financial Intermedia-
tion 7, 338–58.
Battalio, Robert H., 2003, All else equal?: A multidimensional analysis of
retail, market order execution quality, Journal of Financial Markets
6, 143–62.
Bertsimas, Dimitris, and Andrew W. Lo, 1998, Optimal control of execu-
tion costs, Journal of Financial Markets 1, 1–50.
Bessembinder, H., 2004, Does an electronic stock exchange need an
upstairs market?, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 3–36.
Bessembinder, Hendrik, 1999, Trade execution costs on NASDAQ and
the NYSE: A post-reform comparison, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 34, 382–407.
Bessembinder, Hendrik, 2003a, Issues in assessing trade execution costs,
Journal of Financial Markets 6, 233–57.


REFERENCES
185
Bessembinder, Hendrik, 2003b, Quote-based competition and trade exe-
cution costs in NYSE-listed stocks, Journal of Financial Economics
70, 385–422.
Bessembinder, Hendrik, and Herbert Kaufman, 1997, A cross-exchange
comparison of execution costs and information ﬂow for NYSE-listed
stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 293–319.
Bessembinder, Hendrik, William F. Maxwell, and Kumar Venkataraman,
2005, Market transparency and institutional trading costs (Social
Sciences Research Network).
Beveridge, Stephen, and Charles R. Nelson, 1981, A new approach to
decomposition of economic time series into permanent and tran-
sitory components with particular attention to measurement of the
“business cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics 7, 151–74.
Biais, Bruno, Lawrence R. Glosten and Chester Spatt, 2005, Market
microstructure: A survey of microfoundations, empirical results, and
policy implications. Journal of Financial Markets 8, 217–64.
Biais, Bruno, Pierre Hillion and Chester Spatt, 1995, An empirical analysis
of the limit order book and the order ﬂow in the Paris Bourse. Journal
of Finance 50, 1655–89.
Breen, William J., Laurie S. Hodrick, and Robert A. Korajczyk, 2002,
Predicting equity liquidity, Management Science 48, 470–83.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., 2001, Asset Pricing under Asymmetric Infor-
mation (Oxford University Press, Oxford).
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2005. Market liquid-
ity and funding liquidity (Stern School, NYU).
Caballe, Jordi, and Murugappa Krishnan, 1994, Imperfect competition in a
multi-security market with risk neutrality, Econometrica 62, 695–704.
Camerer, Colin, and Richard H. Thaler, 1995, Anomalies: Ultimatums,
dictators and manners, Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 209–19.
Campbell, John Y., Sanford J. Grossman, and Jiang Wang, 1993, Trading
volume and serial correlation in stock returns, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 108, 905–39.
CFA Institute, 2002, Trade Management Guidelines, CFA Institute (for-
merly the American Institute for Management Research), available
online
at
http://www.cfainstitute.org/standards/pdf/trademgmt_
guidelines.pdf.
Chakravarty, Sugato, and Craig W. Holden, 1995, An integrated model
of market and limit orders, Journal of Financial Intermediation 4,
213–41.
Challet, Damien, and Robin Stinchcombe, 2003, Non-constant rates and
over-diffusive prices in a simple model of limit order markets,
Quantitative Finance 3, 155–62.
Chan, Louis K. C., and Josef Lakonishok, 1993, Institutional trades and
intraday stock-price behavior, Journal of Financial Economics 33,
173–99.
Chan, Louis K. C., and Josef Lakonishok, 1995, The behavior of stock prices
around institutional trades, Journal of Finance 50, 1147–74.
Chan, Louis K. C., and Josef Lakonishok, 1997, Institutional equity trading
costs: NYSE versus Nasdaq, Journal of Finance 52, 713–35.


186
REFERENCES
Choi, J. Y., Dan Salandro, and Kuldeep Shastri, 1988, On the estimation
of bid-ask spreads: Theory and evidence, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 23, 219–30.
Christie, William G., Jeffrey H. Harris, and Paul H. Schultz, 1994, Why did
NASDAQ market makers stop avoiding odd-eighth quotes?, Journal
of Finance 49, 1841–60.
Christie, William G., and Paul H. Schultz, 1994, Why do NASDAQ
market makers avoid odd-eighth quotes?, Journal of Finance 49,
1813–40.
Chu, Quentin C., Wen-Liang Gordon Hsieh, and Yiuman Tse, 1999, Price
discovery on the S&P 500 index markets: An analysis of spot index,
index futures and SPDRs, International Review of Financial Analysis
8, 21–34.
Clements, M. P., and David F. Hendry, 1999, Forecasting Non-stationary
Economic Time Series (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
Cochrane, John H., 2005, Asset Pricing (Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ).
Codding, Jamey, 1999, Trading ﬂoors to shut in Sydney and London,
Futures 28, December 1999, 16–17.
Cohen, Kalman J., Steven F. Maier, Robert A. Schwartz, and David
K. Whitcomb, 1981, Transaction costs, order placement strategy,
and existence of the bid-ask spread, Journal of Political Economy 89,
287–305.
Coles, Stuart, 2001, An Introduction to the Statistical Modeling of Extreme
Values (Springer-Verlag, London).
Comerton-Forde, Carole, and James Rydge, 2004, A review of stock market
microstructure (Securities Industry Research Centre of Asia-Paciﬁc,
Sydney).
Conrad, Jennifer S., Kevin M. Johnson, and Sunil Wahal, 2001, Institu-
tional trading and soft dollars, Journal of Finance 56, 397–416.
Conrad, Jennifer S., Kevin M. Johnson, and Sunil Wahal, 2002, The trading
of institutional investors: Theory and evidence, Journal of Applied
Finance 12, 13.
Conrad, Jennifer S., Kevin M. Johnson, and Sunil Wahal, 2003, Institu-
tional trading and alternative trading systems, Journal of Financial
Economics 70, 99–134.
Copeland, Thomas, and Dan Galai, 1983, Information effects and the
bid-ask spread, Journal of Finance 38, 1457–69.
Coppejans, Mark, Ian Domowitz, and Ananth Madhavan, 2001. Liquid-
ity in an automated auction (Department of Economics, Duke
University).
Dacorogna, Michel M., Ramazan Gencay, Ulrich A. Muller, Richard
B. Olsen, and Olivier B. Pictet, 2001, High-Frequency Finance
(Academic Press, New York).
de Jong, Frank, 2002, Measures of contributions to price discovery:
A comparison, Journal of Financial Markets 5, 323–28.
de Jong, Frank, Theo Nijman, and Ailsa Roell, 1995, A comparison of
the cost of trading French shares on the Paris bourse and on SEAQ
international, European Economic Review 39, 1277–301.


REFERENCES
187
Degryse, Hans, 1999, The total cost of trading Belgian shares: Brussels
versus London, Journal of Banking and Finance 23, 1331–55.
Domowitz, Ian, and A. Mahmoud El-Gamal, 1999, Financial market
liquidity and the distribution of prices (Social Sciences Research
Network).
Doornik, Jurgen A., and David F. Hendry, 1997, The implications for
econometric modelling of forecast failure, Scottish Journal of Political
Economy 44, 437–61.
Dufﬁe, Darrell, 2001, Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory, 3rd ed. (Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Easley, David, Soeren Hvidkjaer, and Maureen O’Hara, 2002, Is infor-
mation risk a determinant of asset returns?, Journal of Finance 57,
2185–221.
Easley, David, Nicholas M. Kiefer, and Maureen O’Hara, 1997, One day
in the life of a very common stock, Review of Financial Studies 10,
805–35.
Easley, David, and Maureen O’Hara, 1987, Price, trade size, and infor-
mation in securities markets, Journal of Financial Economics 19,
69–90.
Easley, David, and Maureen O’Hara, 1991, Order form and information in
securities markets, Journal of Finance 46, 905–27.
Easley, David, and Maureen O’Hara, 1992, Time and the process of
security price adjustment, Journal of Finance 47, 576–605.
Eckbo, B. Espen and Jian Liu, 1993, Temporary components of stock
prices: new univariate results. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 28, 161–76.
Ellul, Andrew, Craig W. Holden, Pankaj Jain, and Robert H. Jennings,
2002, Determinants of order choice on the New York Stock Exchange
(Kelley School, University of Indiana).
Embrechts, Paul, Claudia Kluppelberg, and Thomas Mikosch, 1997, Mod-
elling Extremal Events for Insurance and Finance (Springer-Verlag,
London).
Engle, Robert F. and Clive W. J. Granger, 1987, Co-integration and error
correction: representation, estimation and testing. Econometrica 55,
251–76.
Esser, Angelika, and Burkhart Mönch, 2005, The navigation of an
iceberg: the optimal use of hidden orders (Social Sciences Research
Network).
Euronext, 2003, Harmonized Market Rules I, Euronext, available online
at
http://www.euronext.com/editorial/documentation_rules/wide/
0,5371,1732_4558617,00.html.
Fackler, Martin, 2005, Tokyo Exchange struggles with snarls in electron-
ics, New York Times, December 13, 2005.
Farmer, J. Doyne, Paolo Patelli, and Ilija I. Zovko, 2005, The predictive
power of zero intelligence in ﬁnancial markets, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences (Economic Sciences) 102, 2254–59.
Foster, F. Douglas, and S. Viswanathan, 1990, A theory of the inter-
day variations in volume, variance, and trading costs in securities
markets, Review of Financial Studies 3, 593–624.


188
REFERENCES
Foster, F. Douglas, and S. Viswanathan, 1996, Strategic trading when
agents forecast the forecasts of others, Journal of Finance 51, 1437–78.
Foucault, Thierry, 1999, Order ﬂow composition and trading costs in a
dynamic limit order market, Journal of Financial Markets 2, 99–134.
Foucault, Thierry, Ohad Kadan, and Eugene Kandel, 2001, Limit order
book as a market for liquidity (Social Sciences Research Network).
Friedman, Daniel, and John Rust, 1993, The Double Auction Market:
Institutions, Theories and Evidence (Addison-Wesley, New York).
Fuller, Wayne A., 1996, Introduction to Statistical Time Series, 2nd ed.
(John Wiley, New York).
Gabaix,
Xavier,
Parameswaran
Gopikrishnan,
Vasiliki
Plerou,
and
H. Eugene Stanley, 2003, A theory of power law distributions in
ﬁnancial market ﬂuctuations, Nature 423, 267–70.
Garman, Mark, 1976, Market microstructure, Journal of Financial
Economics 3, 257–75.
Gatev, Evan, William N. Goetzmann and K. Geert Rouwenhorst, 2006,
Pairs trading: Performance of a relative-value arbitrage rule. Review
of Financial Studies 19, 797–827.
Glassman, Cynthia A., and Paul S. Atkins, 2005, Dissent of Commissioners
Cynthia A. Glassman and Paul S. Atkins to the Adoption of Regulation
NMS, available online at http://www.sec.gov/rules/ﬁnal/34-51808-
dissent.pdf.
Glosten, Lawrence R., 1989, Insider trading, liquidity, and the role of the
monopolist specialist, Journal of Business 62, 211–35.
Glosten, Lawrence R., 1994, Is the electronic open limit order book
inevitable?, Journal of Finance 49, 1127–61.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Lawrence E. Harris, 1988, Estimating the
components of the bid/ask spread, Journal of Financial Economics
21, 123–42.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask, and transaction
prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders,
Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71–100.
Goettler, Ronald L., Christine A. Parlour, and Uday Rajan, 2003, Welfare
in a dynamic limit order market (GSIA, Carnegie Mellon University).
Goettler, R. L., C. A. Parlour and U. Rajan, 2005, Equilibrium in a dynamic
limit order market. Journal of Finance 60, 2149–92.
Goldstein, Michael A., and Kenneth A. Kavajecz, 2000, Eighths, six-
teenths, and market depth: Changes in tick size and liquidity pro-
vision on the NYSE, Journal of Financial Economics 56, 125–49.
Gonzalo, Jesus, and Clive Granger, 1995, Estimation of common long-
memory components in cointegrated systems, Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics 13, 27–35.
Goodman, George (writing as Adam Smith), 1967, The Money Game
(Random House, New York).
Gourieroux, Christian, and Joanna Jasiak, 2001, Financial Econometrics
(Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Green, Richard C., Burton Holliﬁeld, and Norman Schuerhoff, 2005,
Financial intermediation and the costs of trading in an opaque market
(David A. Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University).


REFERENCES
189
Greene, William H., 2002, Econometric Analysis (Macmillan, New York).
Grifﬁths, Mark D., Brian F. Smith, D. Alasdair S. Turnbull, and Robert
W. White, 2000, The costs and determinants of order aggressiveness,
Journal of Financial Economics 56, 65–88.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Merton H. Miller, 1987, Liquidity and market
structure, Journal of Finance 43, 617–33.
Hamao, Yasushi and Joel Hasbrouck, 1995, Securities trading in the
absence of dealers: trades and quotes on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
Review of Financial Studies 8, 849–78.
Hamilton, James D., 1994, Time Series Analysis (Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ).
Handa, Puneet, and Robert A. Schwartz, 1996, Limit order trading, Journal
of Finance 51, 1835–61.
Harris, Frederick H. deB, Thomas H. McInish, and Robert A. Wood, 2002a,
Common factor components vs. information shares: A reply, Journal
of Financial Markets 5, 341–48.
Harris, Frederick H. deB, Thomas H. McInish, and Robert A. Wood, 2002b,
Security price adjustment across exchanges: An investigation of
common factor components for Dow stocks, Journal of Financial
Markets 5, 277–308.
Harris, Lawrence E., 1990, Statistical properties of the Roll serial
covariance
bid/ask
spread
estimator,
Journal
of
Finance
45,
579–90.
Harris, Lawrence E., 1998, Optimal dynamic order submission strategies
in some stylized trading problems, Financial Markets, Institutions
and Instruments 7, 1–76.
Harris, Lawrence E., 2003, Trading and Exchanges (Oxford University
Press, New York).
Harris, Lawrence E., and Joel Hasbrouck, 1996, Market vs. limit orders:
The SuperDOT evidence on order submission strategy, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 31, 213–31.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 1988, Trades, quotes, inventories, and information,
Journal of Financial Economics 22, 229–52.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 1991a, Measuring the information content of stock trades.
Journal of Finance 46, 179–207.
Hasbrouck,
Joel,
1991b,
The
summary
informativeness
of
stock
trades: An econometric analysis. Review of Financial Studies 4,
571–95.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 1993, Assessing the quality of a security market: A
new approach to transaction-cost measurement. Review of Financial
Studies 6, 191–212.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 1995, One security, many markets: Determining the
contributions to price discovery. Journal of Finance 50, 1175–99.
Hasbrouck,
Joel,
1996a,
Modeling
microstructure
time
series,
in
G. S. Maddala, and C. R. Rao, eds., Handbook of Statistics 14:
Statistical Methods in Finance (Elsevier North Holland, Amsterdam).
Hasbrouck, Joel, 1996b, Order characteristics and stock price evolution:
An application to program trading, Journal of Financial Economics
41, 129–49.


190
REFERENCES
Hasbrouck, Joel, 2002, Stalking the “efﬁcient price” in market microstruc-
ture speciﬁcations: an overview, Journal of Financial Markets 5,
329–39.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 2005, Trading costs and returns for US equities: The
evidence from daily data (Stern School of Business, New York
University).
Hasbrouck, Joel, and Thomas S. Y. Ho, 1987, Order arrival, quote
behavior, and the return-generating process, Journal of Finance 42,
1035–48.
Hasbrouck, Joel, and Gideon Saar, 2003, Technology and liquidity provi-
sion: the blurring of traditional deﬁnitions (Stern School, New York
University).
Hasbrouck, Joel, and George Soﬁanos, 1993, The trades of market makers:
An empirical examination of NYSE specialists, Journal of Finance 48,
1565–93.
Hasbrouck, Joel, George Soﬁanos, and Deborah Sosebee, 1993. New York
Stock Exchange trading systems and procedures (New York Stock
Exchange).
Holden, Craig W., and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1992, Long-lived
private information and imperfect competition, Journal of Finance
47, 247–70.
Holden, Craig W., and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1994, Risk aver-
sion, imperfect competition, and long-lived information, Economics
Letters 44, 181–90.
Huang, Chi-Fu, and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1998, Foundations for Finan-
cial Economics (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ).
Huang, R. D., 1996, Dealer versus auction markets: A paired comparison
of execution costs on NASDAQ and the NYSE, Journal of Financial
Economics 41, 313–57.
Huberman, G., and W. Stanzl, 2004, Price manipulation and quasi-
arbitrage, Econometrica 72, 1247–75.
Ingersoll, Jonathan E. Jr., 1987, Theory of Financial Decision Making
(Rowman and Littleﬁeld, Lanham, MD).
Irvine, Paul J., Marc L. Lipson and Andy Puckett, 2006, Tipping. Review
of Financial Studies forthcoming.
Jones, Charles M., Gautam Kaul, and Marc L. Lipson, 1994, Transac-
tions, volume, and volatility, Review of Financial Studies 7,
631–51.
Kagel, John H., Chung Kim, and Donald Moser, 1996, Fairness in ulti-
matum games with asymmetric information and asymmetric payoffs,
Games and Economic Behavior 13, 100–110.
Karlin, Samuel, and Howard M. Taylor, 1975, A First Course in Stochastic
Processes (Academic Press, New York).
Keim, Donald B., and Ananth Madhavan, 1995, Anatomy of the trading
process: Empirical evidence on the behavior of institutional traders,
Journal of Financial Economics 37(3), 371–98.
Keim, Donald B., and Ananth Madhavan, 1996, The upstairs market for
block trades: Analysis and measurement of price effects, Review of
Financial Studies 9, 1–36.


REFERENCES
191
Keim, Donald B., and Ananth Madhavan, 1997, Transactions costs and
investment style: An inter-exchange analysis of institutional equity
trades, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 265–92.
Kempf, Alexander, and Olaf Korn, 1999, Market depth and order size,
Journal of Financial Markets 2, 29–48.
Klemperer, Paul, 2004, Auctions: Theory and Practice (Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton, NJ).
Kotz, Samuel, N. Balakrishnan, and Norman L. Johnson, 2000, Continuous
Multivariate Distributions, Volume 1: Models and Applications, 2nd
ed. (John Wiley, New York).
Krishna, Vijay, 2002, Auction Theory (Academic Press, San Diego).
Kumar, Praveen, and Duane Seppi, 1994, Limit and market orders with
optimizing traders (Carnegie Mellon University).
Kurov, Alexander, and Dennis J. Lasser, 2004, Price dynamics in the regu-
lar and E-Mini futures markets, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 39, 365–84.
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econo-
metrica 53, 1315–36.
Lancaster, Tony, 1997, The Econometric Analysis of Transition Data
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).
Lee, Charles M. C., 1993, Market integration and price execution for NYSE-
listed securities, Journal of Finance 48, 1009–38.
Lee, Charles M. C., and Mark J. Ready, 1991, Inferring trade direction from
intraday data, Journal of Finance 46, 733–46.
Lehmann, Bruce N. and David M. Modest, 1994, Trading and liquidity on
the Tokyo Stock Exchange: A bird’s eye view. Journal of Finance 49,
951–84.
Lehmann, Bruce N., 2002, Some desiderata for the measurement of
price discovery across markets, Journal of Financial Markets 5,
259–76.
Levitt, Arthur, 1999, Remarks before the Bond Market Association,
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, available online at
http://www.sec.gov/news/speech/speecharchive/1999/spch268.htm.
Llorente, Guillermo, Roni Michaely, Gideon Saar, and Jiang Wang, 2002,
Dynamic volume-return relation of individual stocks, Review of
Financial Studies 15, 1005–47.
Lo, Andrew W., A. Craig MacKinlay, and June Zhang, 2002, Econometric
models of limit order execution, Journal of Financial Economics 65,
31–71.
Lucchetti, Aaron, 2005, ESpeed yanks pricing initiative: electronic bond-
trading ﬁrm alters platform after program sparked complaints about
fees, Wall Street Journal, January 4, 2005, C, p. 1.
Lyons, Richard K., 2001, The Microstructure Approach to Foreign
Exchange Rates (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
Macey, Jonathan R., and Maureen O’Hara, 1997, The law and eco-
nomics of best execution, Journal of Financial Intermediation 6,
188–223.
Madhavan, Ananth, 2000, Market microstructure: A survey, Journal of
Financial Markets 3, 205–58.


192
REFERENCES
Madhavan, Ananth, and Minder Cheng, 1997, In search of liquidity: Block
trades in the upstairs and downstairs markets, Review of Financial
Studies 10(1) 175–203.
Madhavan, Ananth, Matthew Richardson, and Mark Roomans, 1997,
Why do security prices change?, Review of Financial Studies 10,
1035–64.
Madhavan, Ananth, and Seymour Smidt, 1991, A Bayesian model
of intraday specialist pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 30,
99–134.
Madhavan, Ananth, and Seymour Smidt, 1993, An analysis of changes
in specialist inventories and quotations, Journal of Finance 48,
1595–628.
Madhavan, Ananth, and George Soﬁanos, 1998, An empirical analysis of
NYSE specialist trading, Journal of Financial Economics 48, 189–210.
Maguire, Francis, 1998. Life’s problems . . . and solutions, Futures 27,
September, 82–84.
Mathstatica, 2005, available online at http://www.mathstatica.com/
spot_the_error/.
Mendelson, H., and T. I. Tunca, 2004, Strategic trading, liquidity, and
information acquisition, Review of Financial Studies 17, 295–337.
Merton, Robert, 1980, On estimating the expected rate of return on the
market, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323–62.
Milgrom, Paul, 2004, Putting Auction Theory to Work (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge).
Morse, Andrew, 2005, Tokyo Exchange chief quits; Move follows tech-
nology blunders, may slow pace of reforms, Wall Street Journal,
December 21, C, p. 14.
Neal, Robert, and Simon M. Wheatley, 1998, Adverse selection and bid-
ask spreads: Evidence from closed-end funds, Journal of Financial
Markets 1, 121–49.
New York Stock Exchange, 2005, Constitution and Rules.
Niederhoffer, Victor, and M. F. M. Osborne, 1966, Market making and
reversal on the stock exchange, Journal of the American Statistical
Association 61, 897–916.
Odders-White, Elizabeth R., 2000, On the occurrence and consequences
of inaccurate trade classiﬁcation, Journal of Financial Markets 3,
259–86.
O’Hara, Maureen, 1995, Market Microstructure Theory
(Blackwell,
Cambridge, MA).
Parlour, Christine A., 1998, Price dynamics in limit order markets, Review
of Financial Studies 11, 789–816.
Perold, Andre, 1988, The implementation shortfall: Paper vs. reality,
Journal of Portfolio Management 14, 4–9.
Peterson, Mark A., 2003, Order preferencing and market quality on US
equity exchanges, Review of Financial Studies 16, 385–415.
Peterson, Mark A., and Erik R. Sirri, 2002, Order submission strategy and
the curious case of marketable limit orders, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 37, 221–41.


REFERENCES
193
Piwowar, Michael S., and Li Wei, 2005, The sensitivity of effective
spread estimates to trade-quote matching algorithms (New York Stock
Exchange).
Reiss, Peter C., and Ingrid M. Werner, 1998, Does risk-sharing motivate
interdealer trading?, Journal of Finance 53, 1657–703.
Renaldo, Angelo, 2002, Transaction costs on the Swiss stock exchange,
Financial Markets and Portfolio Management 16, 53–68.
Renaldo, Angelo, 2004, Order aggressiveness in limit order book markets,
Journal of Financial Markets 7, 53–74.
Rock, Kevin, 1990, The specialist’s order book and price anomalies
(Graduate School of Business, Harvard University).
Roll, Richard, 1984, A simple implicit measure of the effective
bid-ask spread in an efﬁcient market, Journal of Finance 39,
1127–39.
Ronen, Tavy, 1998, Trading structure and overnight information: A natu-
ral experiment from the Tel-Aviv Stock Exchange, Journal of Banking
and Finance 22, 489–512.
Ross, Sheldon M., 1996, Stochastic Processes (John Wiley, New York).
Roth, Alvin E., 1995, Bargaining experiments, in John H. Kagel, and Alvin
E. Roth, eds., The Handbook of Experimental Economics (Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Roth, Alvin E., and Axel Ockenfels, 2002, Last-minute bidding and the
rules for ending second-price auctions: Evidence from eBay and
Amazon auctions on the internet, American Economic Review 92,
1093–103.
Rubinstein, Ariel, 1982, Perfect equilibrium in a bargaining model,
Econometrica 50, 97–110.
Rust, John, John H. Miller, and Richard Palmer, 1993. Behavior of
trading automata in a computerized double auction market, in
Daniel Friedman, and John Rust, eds., The Double Auction Market
Institutions, Theories and Evidence, Proceedings Volume XIV,
Santa Fe Institute (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA).
Saar, Gideon, 1998, Information and the pricing of assets when orders
arrive one at a time (Johnson School, Cornell University).
Saar, Gideon, and Lei Yu, 2002. Information asymmetry about the ﬁrm and
the permanent price impact of trades: Is there a connection? (Finance
Department, Stern School, NYU).
Sandas, Patrik, 2001, Adverse selection and competitive market making:
evidence from a pure limit order book, Review of Financial Studies
14, 705–34.
Sargent, Thomas J., 1979, Macroeconomic Theory (Academic Press,
New York).
Seppi, Duane J., 1990, Equilibrium block trading and asymmetric infor-
mation, Journal of Finance 45, 73–94.
Seppi, Duane J., 1997, Liquidity provision with limit orders and a strategic
specialist, Review of Financial Studies 10, 103–50.
Shephard, Neil, 2005, Stochastic Volatility (Oxford University Press,
Oxford); esp. General introduction.


194
REFERENCES
Smith, Jeffrey W., 2000, Market vs. limit order submission behavior at
a Nasdaq market maker, (National Association of Securities Dealers
(NASD), NASD Economic Research).
Smith, Jeffrey W., James P. Selway III, and D. Timothy McCormick, 1998,
The Nasdaq stock market: historical background and current opera-
tion (Nasdaq working paper 98-01).
Spiegel, Matthew, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1992, Informed spec-
ulation and hedging in a noncompetitive securities market, Review of
Financial Studies 5, 307–29.
Stewart,
James
B.,
1992,
Den
of
Thieves
(Simon
and
Schuster,
New York).
Stoll, Hans R., 1978, The supply of dealer services in securities markets,
Journal of Finance 33, 1133–51.
Stoll, Hans R., and Christoph Schenzler, 2002, Measuring market quality:
the relation between quoted and effective spreads (Owen School of
Management, Vanderbilt University).
Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar, 1991, Risk aversion, market liquidity, and
price efﬁciency, Review of Financial Studies 4, 416–41.
Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar, 1991, A theory of trading in stock index
futures, Review of Financial Studies 4, 17–51.
Teweles, Richard J., and Bradley, Edward S., 1998, The Stock Market, 7th
ed. (John Wiley, New York).
Thaler, Richard H., 1988, Anomalies: The ultimatum game, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 2, 195–206.
Tsay, Ruey S., 2002, Analysis of Financial Time Series (John Wiley,
New York).
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 1963, Special Study of the
Securities Markets, U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce, via the Securi-
ties and Exchange Commission Historical Society, available online at
http://www.sechistorical.org/collection/papers/1960/1963_SS_Sec_
Markets/.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 1996, Final rule: Order
execution obligations (Release No. 34-37619A; File No. S7-30-95).
CFR 17 Part 240, available online at http://www.sec.gov/rules/ﬁnal/
37619a.txt
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 1996a, Final rule: Order execu-
tion obligations, available online at http://www.sec.gov/rules/ﬁnal/
37619a.txt
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 1996b, Report Persuant to
Section 21(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 Regarding
the NASD and the NASDAQ Market, available online at http://www.
sec.gov/litigation/investreport/nasdaq21a.htm.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 1998, Final rule: Regulation of
exchanges and alternative trading systems (Release No. 34-40760; File
No. S7-12-98), available online at http://www.sec.gov/rules/ﬁnal/34-
40760.txt
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2000, Notice of Filing of
Proposed Rule Change to Rescind Exchange Rule 390 (Release
No. 34-42450; File No. SR-NYSE-99-48), available online at http://
www.sec.gov/rules/sro/ny9948o.htm.


REFERENCES
195
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2001, Frequently Asked Ques-
tions About Rule 11Ac1-5, Division of Market Regulation, Staff Legal
Bulleting No. 12R (Revised), available at http://www.sec.gov/
interps/legal/slbim12a.htm.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2003, Rhino Advisors and
Thomas Badian Settle Claims and Agree to Pay Jointly a $1 Million
Penalty, Litigation Release No. 18003, available online at http://www.
sec.gov/litigation/litreleases/lr18003.htm.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2004a, Regulation NMS
(Proposing Release No. 34-49325; February 26, 2004), available online
at http://www.sec.gov/rules/proposed/34-49325.htm.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2004b, Securities and
Exchange Commission v. Moises Saba Masri, et al., SEC charges
Moises Saba and Albert Sutton with fraud, Litigation Release
No.
18593,
available
online
at
http://www.sec.gov/litigation/
litreleases/lr18593.htm.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2005, Regulation NMS (Final
Rule Release No. 34-51808; June 9, 2005), available online at
http://www.sec.gov/rules/ﬁnal/34-51808.pdf.
Venkataraman, Kumar, 2001, Automated vs. ﬂoor trading: An analysis
of execution costs on the Paris and New York Exchanges, Journal of
Finance 56, 1445–85.
Viswanathan, S., and James J.D. Wang, 2004, Inter-dealer trading in
ﬁnancial markets, Journal of Business 77, 987–1040.
Watson, Mark W., 1986, Univariate detrending methods with stochastic
trends, Journal of Monetary Economics 18, 49–75.
Werner, Ingrid M., 2003, Execution quality for institutional orders routed
to Nasdaq dealers before and after decimals (Dice Center Working
Paper, Ohio State University).
White, Halbert, 2001, Asymptotic Theory for Econometricians (rev. ed.)
(Academic Press, Orlando).
Yao, Jian, 1997, Market making in the interbank foreign exchange market
(Stern School of Business, New York University).


Index
Amihud, Yakov, 108
Asymmetric information, 42;
sequential trade models, 43;
in strategic trade model, 61
Asymmetric information
measures, 53, 85. See also
Probability of informed
trading
Auctions, 17, 18, 64, 170
Autocovariances, univariate,
29; vector, 78
Autoregressive processes,
univariate, 35; vector, 79
Bargaining, 19
Barrier diffusion model, 158
Bertsimas, Dimitris, 153
Best execution, 10, 178
Bid-ask spread, 29, 97; in limit
order markets, 138; in
sequential trade models, 48,
50, 51
CARA utility. See Exponential
utility
Cholesky factorization, 83
Cointegration, 96
Crossing networks, 20
Dealer markets, 14; limit orders
in, 15, 159
Decimalization, 175
Depth improvement, 141
Easley, David, 50, 51, 52, 56
Effective cost, 148; estimation
from trade data, 151; and
implementation shortfall,
145
Ergodicity, 32, 43, 60
Euronext, 170; auctions, 18;
designated dealers, 17;
market orders, 11
Event time, 90
Execution strategies. See
Trading strategies
Exponential utility, 109
Floor markets, 12
Forecasting, multivariate, 81;
univariate, 37
Foucault, Thierry, 126
Garman, Mark, 3, 107
Glosten, Lawrence, 91, 92, 132
Harris, Lawrence, 91, 92, 158
Hvidkjaer, Soeren, 56
Illiquidity ratio, 93
Implementation shortfall, 144
Impulse response function, 81
196


INDEX
197
Information share, 101
Interdealer markets, 15, 116
Invertibility: multivariate, 79;
and unit roots, 114;
univariate, 36
Kiefer, Nicholas, 56
Kyle, A. S., 43, 61
Limit order, 10
Limit order markets, 10; price
discrimination in, 134
Liquidity: attributes, 4; of
competitive dealer market,
133; externality, 5; in a limit
order market, 134; noise
traders, 61; and order choice,
118; and pricing error, 70;
ratio, 93; supplied by a
monopolistic dealer, 134;
time variation in, 90. See
also Price impact
Lo, Andrew, 153
Madhavan, Ananth, 92
Manning rules, 15, 159, 172
Market failure, 49
Market order, 11
Martingale, 25
Mendelson, Haim, 108
Moving average processes,
cointegrated, 97; univariate,
33; vector, 79
NASDAQ, 171. See also
Manning rules
New York Stock Exchange, 13,
167
New York Stock Exchange Rule
390, 176
New York Stock Exchange
specialist, 16, 19, 111, 168
O’Hara, Maureen, 50, 51, 52, 56
Order choice. See also Trading
strategies
Order handling rules. See also
Securities and Exchange
Commission Rule on Order
Execution Obligations
Order qualiﬁcations, 11
Order splitting, 12, 61, 65, 132,
133, 153
Parlour, Christine, 122
Poisson arrival process, 57, 107
Price discovery. See also
Information share; Vector
error correction models
(VECM)
Price impace. See also Liquidity
Price impact, 53; concavity, 90;
estimating from volume, 92;
and realized cost, 148; in
sequential trade models, 48
and trading strategies, 153;
Price improvement, 142
Pricing error, multivariate, 86;
univariate, 70
Priority rules, 11
Probability of informed trading
(PIN), 56
Projection, bivariate normal, 62;
and linear forecasting, 37
Quote display rule (SEC). See
also Securities and Exchange
Commission Rule on Order
Execution Obligations
Quote matching, 48
Random-walk, 26
Random-walk decomposition:
multivariate, 85; univariate,
71. See also Information
share
Random-walk model, 24
Realized cost, 148
Reserve (“iceberg”) orders, 12
Richardson, Matthew, 92
Roll, Richard, 29


198
INDEX
Roomans, Mark, 92
Sandas, Patrik, 131
Securities and Exchange
Commission, 167;
investigation of NASDAQ,
172; investigation of NYSE,
170
Securities and Exchange
Commission Regulation
NMS, 177
Securities and Exchange
Commission Rule on
Alternative Trading Systems,
174; on Order Execution
Obligations, 173
Seppi, Duane, 141
Specialist. See also New York
Stock Exchange
Stationarity, 32
Stoll, Hans, 109
Stop loss orders, 52
Trading strategies, 153; and
order choice, 158
Transparency, 6, 10, 15
Variance ratio, 75
Vector error correction model
(VECM), 99
Wold Theorem, 34
