
 
 
   
   
     
       
     
   
 
 



 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
   
	
 
 WHAT EXACTLY IS CRYPTO? 
	   
	   
	   
	 JONATAN BLUM 
	   
 
 



 
 
   
   ----- 
	   
	 © Copyright 2022 Jonatan Blum. All Rights Reserved. 
	 No part of this guide may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles or reviews. 
	 For rights and permissions, please contact: 
	 jonatan@thecryptobook.xyz 
	 Legal & Disclaimer 
	   
	 The information contained in this book and its contents is not designed to replace or take the place of any form of medical, financial, or professional advice; and is not meant to replace the need for independent medical, financial, legal, or other professional advice or services, as may be required. The content and information in this book have been provided for educational and entertainment purposes only. The content and information contained in this book have been compiled from sources deemed reliable, and it is accurate to the best of the Author's knowledge, information, and belief. However, the Author cannot guarantee its accuracy and validity and cannot be held liable for any errors and/or omissions. Further, changes are periodically made to this book as and when needed. Where appropriate and/or necessary, you must consult a professional (including but not limited to your doctor, attorney, financial advisor, or such other professional advisor) before using any of the suggested remedies, techniques, or information in this book. 
	 Upon using the contents and information contained in this book, you agree to hold harmless the Author from and against any damages, costs, and expenses, including any legal fees potentially resulting from the application of any of the information provided by this book. You agree that the author is not liable to any loss, injury, or damage sustained in any way. This disclaimer applies to any loss, damages, or injury caused by the use and application, whether directly or indirectly, of any advice or information presented, whether for breach of contract, tort, negligence, personal injury, criminal intent, or under any other cause of action. You agree to accept all risks of using the information presented inside this book. You agree that by continuing to read this book, where appropriate and/or necessary, you shall consult a professional (including but not limited to your doctor, attorney, or financial advisor, or such other advisor as needed) before using any of the suggested remedies, techniques, or information in this book. 
	 ----- 
	   
 
 



 
 
   
   Contents 
	 Glossary 
	 Preface 
	 Chapter 1:  Introduction to Crypto 
	 What Exactly Made these Pre-Bitcoin Inventions Fail, and How Did Bitcoin Differentiate Itself? 
	 What Are the Reasons for Decentralization in a Digital Currency? 
	 Chapter 2:  The Origin of Bitcoin 
	 What Is Bitcoin Mining? 
	 Token Emission 
	 Tokenomics 
	 A Verification System 
	 What Is a Node? 
	 Are There Any Risks? 
	 Is Bitcoin Immutable? 
	 Scalability 
	 Lightning Network 
	 Chapter 3:  Altcoins, the “Alternatives” 
	 What Does “Altcoin” Mean? 
	 The First Altcoins 
	 EC20 Tokens 
	 Chapter 4:  Ethereum, a New World Is Opened 
	 What Exactly Is Ethereum? 
	 Ethereum Layer 2 
	 Consensus Mechanisms and the Byzantine Generals Problem 
	 Ethereum 2.0 “The Merge” 
	 Sharding 
	 Ethereum Dilemma 
	 Chapter 5:  Web1 – Web2 – Web3 
	 Web1 (1991–2004) 
	 Web2 (2005–present) 
	 Web3 (Future) 
	 Layers of Web3 
	 Decentralized Applications 
	 Chapter 6:  Decentralized Finance 
	 Decentralized Exchanges 
	 History of Uniswap 
	 AMM vs. Order-Book 
	 The Benefits of DeFi 
	 Chapter 7:  Decentralized Autonomous Organizations 
	 Traditional Organizations vs. DAOs 
	 DAO Tokens 
	 Working in DAOs 
	 Regulatory Aspect 
	 Types of DAOs 
	 Chapter 8:  Decentralization: Realistic or an Illusion? 
	 The Different Levels of Decentralization in a Cryptocurrency 
	 Decentralization, an Illusion? 
	 Web3: VC-Owned or Public-Owned? 
	 Chapter 9:  Non-Fungible Tokens 
	 Fungibility and Non-Fungibility 
	 What Can NFTs Be Used For? 
	 NFT Real Estate 
	 Chapter 10:  Zero-Knowledge Proofs and Private Verifiability 
	 Verifiability 
	 ZKrollups and Optimistic Rollups 
	 Chapter 11:  What’s in Store for the Future of Crypto? 
	 Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) 
	 What Does the Future Look Like? 
	 Concerns and Censorship 
	 Chapter 12:  The Metaverse 
	 How New Is the Metaverse? 
	 Future Trends 
	 Consequences of the Metaverse 
	 Conclusion 
	 Tools and Resources 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Glossary 
	 Terminologies relevant for this book in crypto and Web3: 
	 Airdrop:  In the world of cryptocurrencies, an airdrop refers to a project’s free distribution of tokens or coins that are sent directly to its members' or customers' wallets. 
	 Bitcoin (BTC) :   The very first cryptocurrency, introduced in 2008 in a now-famous whitepaper titled "A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System" that is now known as the "Bitcoin whitepaper" written by a mysterious figure only known as "Satoshi Nakamoto" (who is typically thought to be a pseudonym). The first Bitcoin was created on January 3, 2009. 
	 Block:  A blockchain's fundamental feature is a block. Data such as transactions are kept in a separate compartment there. 
	 Blockchain : Because a blockchain stores data in "blocks," which are discrete units linked together or "chained," the term "blockchain" was coined. New data is entered into blocks in a blockchain, which are then sequentially connected. The blockchain lengthens as more data is added. Users now have an easy way to determine when a piece of data was initially added to the database. The blockchain has established itself as a very dependable and trustworthy business resource for both individuals and corporations because it is open and cannot be manipulated to a high degree. 
	 Cryptocurrency:  Cryptocurrency, also known as “crypto,” is a digital currency that usually does not rely on any central authority to uphold or maintain it. Instead, transaction and ownership data are stored in a digital ledger using distributed ledger technology, typically a blockchain. Bitcoin was the first cryptocurrency on the market. 
	 Cryptography:  The technique of applying mathematics to encrypt and shield private information from malicious individuals. 
	 DAO:  The term "Decentralized Autonomous Organization," or DAO, refers to organizations that are administered by their members and independent of any one person or group. These organizations don't have any form of hierarchical, top-down structure, unlike a normal corporation or government. The organization's standards of conduct are stored on a blockchain to maintain transparency and decentralization. The majority of the time, joining a DAO involves purchasing a digital token used for governance. 
	 DApps : Decentralized applications, or "DApps," are pieces of software that are constructed on top of the blockchain. DApps are programs that operate autonomously and adhere to smart contract regulations. A DApp features a graphical user interface and is intended to assist you in some way, much like any other app on your phone. 
	 DeFi:  A financial system called DeFi, which stands for decentralized finance, is based on the blockchain. A financial system established on the blockchain that lacks a central authority, such as a bank, governmental organization, or financial management firm, is known as decentralized finance. 
	 DEX:  Decentralized exchanges, known as DEXs, are cryptocurrency exchanges that operate with crypto assets without the assistance of third parties. They enable dealers to negotiate deals directly with one another as a result. While DEXs offer a direct peer-to-peer trading mechanism based on smart contract execution, their operations are comparable to those of traditional centralized platforms. 
	 Ethereum (ETH):  Vitalik Buterin launched the Ethereum blockchain network, a decentralized ledger system, in 2015. Ethereum, the open-source network's native cryptocurrency, is also known as "Ether" or "ETH." The Ethereum platform, which we'll discuss in more detail in this book, also enables smart contracts. After Bitcoin, Ethereum is the world's second-most valuable cryptocurrency. 
	 Fiat:  Any form of currency that has been declared legal tender by a government body is referred to as "fiat money." It should not be mistaken for the same-named automobile manufacturer. (A "fiat" is a term used to describe the act of saying something.) Fiat money is not backed by something valuable in and of itself, such as a reserve of gold or silver. 
	 Fungibility:  Fungibility describes the ability of an asset to be exchanged with another “identical” other. An example of this is the exchange of one dollar for another dollar. These two “assets” are one and the same, having the component of fungibility. However, other assets are not fungible, for example, a house or a piece of art. This is more a perceived value, and each piece is unique, with distinct characteristics. With art, each piece is made sure to be “an original,” but art often becomes copied and forged due to the lack of verifiability. 
	 Gas/Gwei:  The price that must be paid in order to execute a smart contract or transaction on the Ethereum blockchain. Gas, which is often valued at a very little amount of ETH known as gwei, is how nodes, (previously miners), are compensated. Gwei is the name of the smallest unit of measurement for the cryptocurrency ETH. 1 ETH is equivalent to $1 billion gwei. 
	 Liquidity:  In crypto, liquidity is the amount of capital that is at disposal on a given platform to be used to exchange different assets. 
	 Minting:  The process of creating a non-fungible token (NFT) that can be sold and purchased from a digital asset that has been placed on the blockchain. An NFT cannot be modified once it has been created due to the way that the blockchain functions. The blockchain needs a lot of energy to mint NFTs. As a result, the blockchain and those who promote it have drawn heavy criticism. 
	 Noncustodial wallet:  A wallet for virtual currency. For example, MetaMask is a piece of software designed for the Ethereum network. 
	 Peer-to-peer:  Also known as “P2P,” this refers to a network of computers that can communicate with one another without the use of a centralized server to monitor their activities. The computers that comprise a P2P network alternately manage it. 
	 Private blockchain:  A blockchain with permissions is a private blockchain. Private blockchains function by limiting who can join in the network through access controls. The network is controlled by one or more entities, which makes it necessary to conduct transactions through third parties. Only the parties involved in a transaction on a private blockchain will be aware of it; outside parties won't have access to it. A fantastic illustration of a private blockchain is Hyperledger Fabric from the Linux Foundation. 
	 Public blockchain:  A public blockchain is devoid of restrictions. Within the blockchain, anyone can join the network and read, publish, or participate. A public blockchain is decentralized and lacks a central authority that governs the entire network. Since it is impossible to change or edit data once it has been verified on the blockchain, data on a public blockchain are safe. Public blockchains include the well-known Bitcoin and Ethereum. 
	 Private key:  An alphanumeric code used in cryptography that a user must enter to access their wallet or exchange assets or currencies based on blockchains. 
	 Public key:  A public key is a string of characters that links and identifies a wallet. Similar to a "bank account number," this is also referred to as a "public key." It's the password that other users would use to transfer money to wallet. 
	 Smart contracts:  Smart contracts were first proposed in 1994 by Nick Szabo. [1]  Computer programs called "smart contracts" are created on the blockchain. When both parties to a contract have carried out their respective obligations, they are set up to take effect automatically. They operate independently and without the assistance of a third party once they have been coded and the terms have been agreed upon. Because smart contracts are built on the blockchain, both parties may keep a close eye on them, but they cannot be altered after they have been made. By using smart contracts, people put their trust in verifiable and usually open-source code connected to the blockchain, instead of people and changeable software. 
	 Tokenomics:  The word "tokenomics" refers to all of the various characteristics of a virtual currency that can affect its market value. The word "token" and the word "economics" are combined to form the phrase. 
	 TradFi:  The acronym "TradFi" is sometimes used in the Bitcoin community to make fun of "conventional finance." Governments, banks, and other financial institutions control and regulate currency under the pre-DeFi model of centralized financial power, which is referred to as "traditional finance." 
	 Turing complete:  This term is taken from the computer pioneer Alan Turing. During the early generations of computers, Alan Turing explained that there would one day be a machine that could solve any problem. This machine became known as the "Turing Machine." This machine could hypothetically answer all computational calculations. Suppose a programming language is "Turing complete." In that case, it means that it duplicates the Turing Machine by being able to run any program and solve any calculation that the Turing Machine can solve. 
	 Virtual machine:  This is a compute resource that uses software instead of a physical computer to run programs and deploy applications. 
	 Wallet : Short for "cryptocurrency wallet," refers to a piece of software that holds and safeguards the private keys that are required to access blockchain-based assets and accounts. 
	 — 
 
 



 
 
   
   Preface 
	 Perhaps you have been interested in crypto but have struggled to know where to start. Or maybe you have invested in crypto but don't feel that you understand the whole picture? Perhaps you are an expert but want one book that can keep all the necessary information in one place? If you answered yes to any of the above, this book is perfect for you. I created this book to directly address your problems so that you can stay ahead of everyone else who will not read this book. 
	 There are three types of people in the crypto world right now: beginners, intermediates, and experts. You are in the first category if you don't know anything about crypto. You likely have lots of stuff going on in your life and you have more important stuff to be doing than speculating on cryptocurrencies. In general, crypto has been something you really don't feel too safe about. If you are in this first category, I will show you what you have missed. I will help you understand this internet phenomenon called crypto (or blockchain), which will play a more critical role in the future. 
	 This book is also undoubtedly for those in the second group who know a little about cryptocurrencies and are maybe even familiar with the terms blockchain and Web3 but don't feel that they know enough. You will get an enhanced insight into the entire space and finally get the overview you have been trying to achieve by reading many articles online or watching different YouTube videos. You don't need that anymore; this book is all you need. 
	 Finally, you may be in the third category, making you the expert within cryptocurrencies. Perhaps you have 5-years of trading experience or are a Web3 founder. Nonetheless, this book will cover things you may not have been aware of. At the same time, you will have a book that has gathered all the information you may be passionate about in one place. A book you can give to friends and family. 
	 My name is Jonatan. I have been involved with crypto since 2017, both actively investing and participating in projects. I have been obsessed with cryptocurrencies for 5 years and have been told I have what it takes to teach others. I have spent thousands of hours learning and researching. This book attempts to make the learning experience easier for others by gathering what I think is most important in one place. I have tried to not only make this book something that empowers a person's overview of the space, but also to give the person the critical insight necessary not to be fooled by driving narratives that may not be as true as they seem. Crypto is a fantastic space driven by incredibly passionate people, but this passion also blinds them toward a bias, including me. 
	 To start my research, I contacted 10 random and highly active crypto profiles on Twitter to see the underlying narratives. If you don't know it already, Twitter is crypto enthusiasts' biggest social media platform. You find them speaking their minds and sharing knowledge, insights, and analytics. You can learn a lot from being active on Twitter, reading, and connecting with people, something I have done for quite some time. I asked these people one question: 
	 "What is it that got you into the world of crypto?" 
	 I could tell you my own answer to that question in this book, but I didn't want the book to be too subjective. I tried to find the repeated answers so I could go deeper into the reasons for them. An inherent, deep underlying narrative is driving the cryptocurrency space, being more than just money or speculation. 
	 I will go through each of the individual answers from the 10 Twitter profiles and elaborate on them. 
	 First answer: 
	 I got into crypto for financial freedom. I also discovered that the next set of millionaires won't emerge from the oil and gas industry but from the cryptocurrency industry. I wanted to be my bank and my banker as well, so I switched to decentralized finance. Finally, I love cryptocurrency because it's the future of finance, most especially DeFi. 
	 This is a standard answer, something that inherently underpins each of us. Humans don't want to work; they don't want to be limited to a 9–5 job. For many, crypto has been the way out, a hope for something better. It has genuinely given thousands what we call "financial freedom," but it has also done the exact opposite, whereby people have lost entire investments. 
	 Crypto adoption is also driven by the idea that this is the future of finance. It is not for no reason; crypto has the potential to replace old models and effectivize lots of interactions. This narrative is one of the driving forces behind it, and it is due to this that people adopt it. If you believe that crypto is the future, you will try to familiarize yourself with it, especially before anyone else, so that you can stay ahead. 
	 Finally, as we see in the answer, adoption is also driven by the idea that "you are your bank." You control your own funds. You can do things with these funds to increase their valuation. With the loss of trust in established financial institutions like banks, removing that trust and dependence is freeing for many people. 
	 Second answer: 
	 Loss of trust in fiat currency. 
	 The loss of trust has not only been in financial institutions, but also fiat currencies themselves. Inflation seems to be the prime reason this lack of confidence exists because inflation debases people’s currencies and makes them worthless over time. 
	 Third answer: 
	 Decreasing trust in fiat currency motivated me to consider Bitcoin as an alternative store of value." I got into crypto for two major reasons: 1. I saw it as a good means of income. 2. I wanted to be part of what I perceived to be a financial revolution. 
	 The cryptocurrency spaces have lots of monetary incentives and are becoming income opportunities for people. So, this is also a reason people are adopting cryptocurrencies. However, here we see a new narrative. That crypto is “a financial revolution.” Many believe this is an active revolution whereby independent, decentralized cryptocurrency networks compete against centralized financial institutions. This new framework is for those that want to remove their dependence on these institutions and free themselves. For example, people are aware that even national central banks can go bankrupt. When they do, people either lose all their money or are severely financially limited, like in Lebanon in 2019. 
	 In many ways, cryptocurrency and Web3 are a revolution but a nonviolent one. It is a revolution where people are building their freedom and acting to free themselves by creating systems that favor the people’s interests and independence. 
	 Revolutions of the past were driven by the desire of the masses to free themselves from their authoritarian and unjust rulers. For example, the common narrative pertaining to the French Revolution (1787–1799) [ 2]  was that the French people rebelled and wanted freedom from the overcontrolling Monarch, Louis XIV, and the Catholic Church. With the Haitian Revolution (1791–1804), [3]  slaves successfully rebelled against the unjust French colonial rule in Saint-Domingue and created what is today the sovereign state of Haiti. Finally, with the American Revolution (1765–1783), people rebelled against the perceived unjust British rule in the American colonies. [4] 
	 These revolutions were violent because injustice directly affected people’s lives. Revolutions are about establishing a new order of things, going against the authorities or the ones in power for a new common ideal held by the people. In this sense, this is a revolution. 
	 Fourth answer: 
	 The tech and DeFi, the idea of one being able to control their own finances was everything for me. Also the trend we went from web 1 to web 2 now web 3. To me, it just sounded right to be part of this community and build with it. 
	 This is all about being in control of one’s own finances. 
	 Fifth answer: 
	 I got into the space because I saw the potential for cryptocurrencies to give everyone access to payments, regardless of their religious beliefs, race, citizenship, gender identity, or any other discriminating factor. I see the future of blockchains as enabling coercion-free societies that are opt-in by default. People will be able to participate in any social structure they want without the risk of losing their livelihood, and without imposing those social structures on others. 
	 The idea of a system open to anyone without discrimination is also a driving thought behind the adoption. People do not necessarily agree with regulations or sanctions, and they feel the need to create and support systems that are coercion-free and not limited in any way or form. 
	 Sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth answer: 
	 For me, it's the technology and how transformative it can be. This transparent, decentralized system can revolutionize how society works and put power into the hands of the users. Also, the timing was great. I wasn't too early nor too late. There's a lot to do, and I love building startups. The opportunities and the technology got me into it. 
	 Decentralized services can act as global public infrastructure. Services that don’t discriminate and are truly neutral. Seems like a fairly worthwhile endeavor to me! 
	 It started with money. Along the way, you learn about how unsustainable the way things operate is. The maliciousness, the control, how it does not need to be this way. The power of this technology is immense. It's still about money to a degree, but now there’s much more involved. 
	 To get out of poverty. 
	 Financial independence. 
	 While most people know almost nothing about cryptocurrencies, people who are “in crypto” perceive it to be an ongoing financial and social revolution. Some are in it for the dream of achieving financial independence, be it independence from banks or independence in which they have enough money to live a more accessible life without a 9–5 job. At the same time, most of the people actively building and developing cryptocurrency networks are often cyberpunks and cryptographers. These groups are known to be active in fighting for privacy and independence on the internet. Since cryptocurrencies operate without any central authority, anarcho-capitalists are also increasingly adopting them. Anarcho-capitalism is a political ideology that wants complete freedom from governments and authorities. Wikipedia puts it this way: 
	 “Anarcho-capitalism is a libertarian political philosophy and economic theory that seeks to abolish centralized states in favor of stateless societies with systems of private property enforced by private agencies, the non-aggression principle, free markets, and the right-libertarian interpretation of self-ownership, which extends the concept to include control of private property as part of the self.” [ 5] 
	 In many ways, this ideology is directly opposed to nation-states. The true dream of a crypto and Web3 enthusiast is a world with no central authority but only human-incentivized cooperation. In such a world, central banks do not exist, and because central banks do not exist in such a world, the rationale for nation states is increasingly weakened. 
	 Therefore, there may be a clash. A clash where the dream is either crushed or realized, and one of the diametrically opposed groups will use violence to achieve its dominance. In this case, only the nation-states are “allowed” to use violence because such ideologies threaten their survival. 
	 I am not saying either is good, and I am not saying that violent revolutions are ever an answer, but the dream of a world without central banks or nation states, thinking that they will hand over their power to the people, is an illusion. 
	 Most people are not at these extremes. People abide by rules and regulations and, at the same time, stand for ideals such as democracy, which are inherent in cryptocurrencies and Web3. Standing for the idea of a democratic financial system does not mean that one wants to oppose or rebel against central banks. In fact, fiat currencies offer the least volatile form of currency, functioning as the stabilizing factor in crypto. Stability, which is also typically one of the goals of a central bank, is absolutely needed in crypto and Web3. 
	 However, BTC (Bitcoin) could become a global reserve currency instead of the USD. It could even become less volatile than the USD due to the lower factor of inflation, thus functioning as a stable form of value if it reaches acceptance by most people (or nations) worldwide. 
	 Overall, crypto is perceived as something that can change the world. Something that can disrupt old ways of doing things and bring new opportunities to people all around the world. This is due to the facts of how blockchains operate and what they enable. For those who are new to the space of cryptocurrency, blockchain, and Web3, you will have to get a little background history into how this came about, what blockchains are and what they enable. As you read on, I will answer the following, so you get an insight into why people perceive crypto as they do. 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Chapter 1:  Introduction to Crypto 
	 Crypto is a polarizing topic; people seem to either love it or hate it. Unless you have been living under a stone, you have undoubtedly heard about cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin, or Ethereum. No matter your opinions and perspectives, this book will give you a detailed overview of the space, deep insight into the key driving narratives behind it, and sufficient technical understanding. 
	 Today, the term "crypto" is a prefix primarily referring to cryptocurrencies. A prefix is an independent part of a word and is usually placed before a word. Words like "cryptocurrency," "cryptography," and "cryptoanalysis" contain the same prefix because they are related to the same concept. This concept resides in the meaning of the word "hidden" or "secret," from the ancient Greek word "Kryptos." 
	 In a more detailed explanation, these words are all related concepts since they revolve around the concept of cryptography, the science of hiding information. Throughout the history of communication, it has been necessary for influential people such as army generals or statesmen to hide certain information from others for numerous reasons. The way they would go about hiding this information, which could be anything from military or state secrets, was to create encoded messages that needed to be encrypted through a hidden key. The key was the method and or methodology of encrypting the secret message. 
	 One example is the monoalphabetic cipher, often known as a simple substitution cipher. This cipher replaces each letter of the plain text with a different letter of the alphabet. It uses a fixed key made up of shuffled alphabet letters. This may sound complex, but it is not. 
	 If I were to write these letters on a piece of paper: 
	 APYSBF 
	 It would be hard to interpret the meaning. You could replace it with any other alphabetic letter, but to know exactly what word it represents is almost impossible. 
	 
	 However, with an alphabetic key like the one above, you could decipher each letter with the letter that it represents. This could then easily be read and interpreted. 
	 APYSBF = CRYPTO. 
	 Early examples of cryptography come from the Spartan military. They used the "Scythe transposition cipher." One of the first detailed explanations of cryptography comes from Al-Khalil (717–786), [6]  an Arab polymath who wrote  The Book of Cryptographic Messages. 
	 Using coded messages to hide the original meaning is the inherent principle in cryptography. Although it was mostly used in ancient times for state and military purposes, today, it is inherent in the structure of the internet. This is perhaps unknown to many. 
	 Cryptographic algorithms essentially protect users from having their information publicly displayed everywhere, and this is done to protect people's private information and user data. It is also used for secure communication online between protocols and services like "HTTP." Here, algorithms ensure that information is not accessible or readable to anyone except the necessary receiver for which the information is intended. 
	 An important book published in 2001 called  Crypto: How the Code Rebels Beat the Government, Saving Privacy in the Digital Age  tells us the inside story of how a group of "crypto rebels," nerds, and visionaries turned into "freedom fighters" to defeat “Big Brother.” The “crypto rebels” collaborated with corporate interests in the United States and successfully ensured that the internet was cryptographically secure and private for all users. 
	 At that time, "crypto" almost always referred to cryptography, but today, "crypto" is a term for anything related to cryptocurrencies, the "money of the internet." 
	 Crypto refers to the technology behind to the actual digital currencies themselves. The term came to public light in 2009, after the introduction of Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency. Later, when more and more cryptocurrencies started to arrive, they were named "crypto" because they were essentially digital currencies that adopted cryptography for their encryption and had cryptography inherent in their design. 
	 This book refers to "crypto" as cryptocurrencies and everything associated with them, from DeFi, blockchain, and Web3. "Crypto" is also used in this book to refer to a specific cryptocurrency. Reading on, you will get a brief insight into crypto's evolution, answers to the fundamental questions, and a description of all the essential terminologies. We will explain the most important aspects of "crypto" to increase your confidence in this topic when you have finished the book. Finally, we will also attempt to explain why cryptocurrencies have gotten so much hype and the reason behind all the buzz. 
	 In many people's eyes, cryptocurrencies truly have the potential to revolutionize the world and create a new future of digital innovation as we have never seen before. The internet is an example of a technology that in a short span of time completely changed the world. In many ways, the same is happening with cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology today, having an even accelerated adoption rate. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us blockchain vs. internet, in comparison to their early years. Blockchain has had an accelerated adoption rate. Based on data from: (https://www.internetworldstats.com/emarketing.htm)  ( https://www.blockchain.com/charts/my-wallet-n-users) 
	 Blockchain technology has been adopted at a faster pace compared to the internet. However, that may also be thanks to the internet itself. 
	 Ever since the start of the internet in the 1980s, [7]  there have been attempts to create something dubbed as digital currencies. DigiCash and E-Gold, introduced in 1983 and 1996, are examples of this. The internet has always been about sharing information with people worldwide, no matter where one is or resides. These digital currencies can thus be seen as a natural evolution of the internet. The internet has been a part of something that has connected people worldwide toward further globalization. As the world evolves, new technology disrupts the previous. For example, email disrupted the traditional postal industry, and Spotify disrupted the CD industry. Now, crypto is disrupting traditional finance. 
	 Since the 1980s, people have been trying to create a digital monetary structure, but many obstacles needed to be solved before the launch of Bitcoin in 2009. The fundamental idea behind a digital currency was the ability to send value across national borders easily, letting people interact financially without limitations, so the world could be connected in new ways. DigiCash and E-Gold were proposals for this, but how they approached solving this issue would prove to be a problem. They perhaps created a digital monetary structure but did not, for example, ensure that transactions were done peer-to-peer (P2P). 
	 What Exactly Made these Pre-Bitcoin Inventions Fail, and How Did Bitcoin Differentiate Itself? 
	 When you think of a digital currency, you think of a system that lets you send and receive value to whoever you want, whenever you want, ideally in an instant. You don't think about cash or something tangible, but something digitally inside the screens that we use every day. 
	 The usual definition of tangible is a thing that is "shown, touched, or experienced:" something physical. However, digital systems are not physical, so they are not limited in the same way. In such a system, it is essential to keep track of all transactions, purchases, and sales so that the system knows who has the specific sum that is theirs. Suppose Alice has $100 and sends the money to Bob. Then, $100 must be deducted from Alice's account, and $100 must be added to Bob's account. This was easy if you wanted to do it the usual way. You had a third party or financial authority as the verifier. They would then ensure that the system did not provide incorrect information and could be responsible for preventing manipulation or sudden collapse. More importantly, they had to ensure that the money could not be used more than once, the "double-spending" problem. 
	 Double-spending is the risk that a cryptocurrency can be used twice or more. Transaction information within a blockchain can be altered if specific conditions are met. The conditions allow modified blocks to enter the blockchain; if this happens, the person that initiated the alteration can reclaim spent coins. [8] 
	 Imagine if there was a digital currency where users could use the money that they had more than once. That would be a fatal error and could potentially disrupt the entire system. This was one of the problems inherent in creating a digital currency, because the usual way was to have a third party responsible for these issues. 
	 This seemingly natural approach would have a central authority oversee and determine actions within the system so that everything functions according to the requirements. However, centralization would prove to become a big problem within a digital currency system. 
	 Many problems may arise when factors such as centralization are inherent in the structure of a digital currency. There is now a central point of failure, meaning that if that part fails, it will disrupt the entire system from working correctly. There is one unit responsible for all the decision-making. A limited number of brains need to be held responsible for immense tasks affecting everyone else. It is siloed and a monopolized structure that does not include anyone. It also makes it increasingly possible for human failures, such as communication problems within a group of workers and internal strife. With DigiCash and E-Gold, these were some of the issues that destroyed the projects. 
	 Essentially, DigiCash failed because it was centralized, and its survival depended on the decisions of the company running it. [9] 
	 
	 This graphic visualizes a hierarchical structure, usually having someone leading at the top. 
	 These digital currencies had to be verified by a central "authority" or unit (hierarcical), and there was thus little to distinguish their structure from that of a central bank. 
	 Satoshi Nakamoto said, “the problem with centralized systems is all the trust that is required for it to work.” 
	 Satoshi Nakamoto is the name used by the presumed pseudonymous person or persons who developed Bitcoin, authored the Bitcoin white paper, and created and deployed Bitcoin's original reference implementation. As part of the implementation, Nakamoto also devised the first blockchain database. [10] 
	 These previous inventions to Bitcoin were all centralized in one way or another and had failed to create or ensure that their monetary system was decentralized. Due to this, a decentralized system would be more autonomous and could function with limited-to-no human intervention. It would effectively eliminate many, if not all, of the issues faced in DigiCash and E-Gold. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us a visualized comparison between a centralized and a decentralized structure. 
	 What Are the Reasons for Decentralization in a Digital Currency? 
	 There are typically numerous defenses made for decentralization. The rationale for decentralization is the following. 
	 
	 Decentralized systems have a higher fault tolerance since they rely on numerous independent components that are less likely to malfunction. 
	 Attack resistance: Decentralized systems lack sensitive central locations that may be targeted for a far lower cost than the economic magnitude of the surrounding system. It costs more to attack, destroy, or influence them. 
	 Collusion resistance: In contrast to the leadership of corporations, who frequently collude in ways that benefit themselves even if it harms less well-coordinated citizens and the public, participants in transparent and decentralized systems find it much harder to act in ways that benefit them at the expense of other participants. 
 
	 The question that cryptographers asked at the time of DigiCash’s failure, who realized these inherent problems of centralized structures, was: 
	 How could we verify transactions being done without “us” or a “trusted third party” doing it? Meaning, without a central point of control? 
	 In 1998, Wei Dai's b-money became the first proposal to introduce the idea of creating money through computational puzzles and without a third party. [11] 
	 Wei Dai earned a bachelor's degree in computer science with a minor in mathematics from the University of Washington. He was a programmer at TerraSciences in Acton, Massachusetts, before moving to Redmond, Washington, to work for Microsoft in the Cryptography Research Group. He proposed the cryptographic monetary concept b-money. Satoshi Nakamoto would later quote him in the Bitcoin whitepaper. 
	 If Alice sends money to Bob, how could we verify that Alice "sent" the money to Bob and who would ensure it was delivered without it being a trusted third party or a financial institution? This was the most crucial question that these cryptography enthusiasts asked themselves, and for a long time they didn’t quite figure it out. That is until Bitcoin came along. Bitcoin had created exactly this, a digital currency that was not dependent on a third party or central authority. 
	 From the Bitcoin whitepaper, created by the pseudonymous founder Satoshi Nakamoto: 
	 A purely peer-to-peer version of electronic cash would allow online payments to be sent directly from one party to another without going through a financial institution. Digital signatures provide part of the solution, but the main benefits are lost if a trusted third party is still required to prevent double-spending. We propose a solution to the double-spending problem using a peer-to-peer network. [12] 
	 The fundamental aspect of P2P transactions enables direct financial transactions between users. Alice could send Bob money even if she was in Portugal and Bob in Costa Rica. Alice could pay online directly to the seller. All this without the need for anyone except the blockchain itself to verify the transactions. This opened the internet toward the next evolution. 
	 
	 This graphic visualizes a peer-to-peer transaction, showing that it goes directly to the recipient (Bob) with no intermediaries. 
	 Satoshi Nakamoto would interact with other cryptography enthusiasts on online forums and email. Together they would update and develop the first cryptocurrency. Very soon after Bitcoin was officially introduced and the media started giving it attention, Satoshi Nakamoto disappeared from the public eye. His last email was sent in April 2011. [13]  The Bitcoin community would then be maintained by these early contributors and enthusiasts interacting online. The network was always supposed to be open-source, transparent, and "community" driven so that decentralization could be realized. 
	 This invention introduced the first P2P cryptocurrency, and it changed the digital world in many ways that people still don't comprehend, and not just from a financial standpoint. It enabled for an entirely new innovative wave of financial technologies based on blockchain. It opened a new way where people did not need to rely on a centralized monetary authority and could interact freely. 
	 The Bitcoin whitepaper came just after "the financial crisis of 2007–2008," [14]  where markets plunged and there was a lot of chaos in many sectors. Bitcoin served as a proposed solution to these exact problems. It set the stage for the adoption of Bitcoin. 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Chapter 2:  The Origin of Bitcoin 
	 Today, Bitcoin has become a recognized investment tool and serves as a “hedge against inflation” for many people. 
	 In case you don’t know what inflation is, it is when the prices of almost “everything” rise because the government decides to intervene in the economy and create money from nothing. 
	 In economics, inflation is a general increase in the prices of goods and services in an economy. When the general price level rises, each unit of currency buys fewer goods and services; consequently, inflation corresponds to a reduction in the purchasing power of money. [15] 
	 What’s left out in this definition is the reason for a rise in prices: governments print money into the economy, effectively introducing more money into the supply, which lessens its value. Other assets seem like they go up in price, but it is actually the purchasing power of the fiat currency that is weakened against that asset. 
	 The fundamentals to understanding any economy are the relationship between supply and demand. In this case, printing money increases the supply. To be more specific, it reduces the value of your money. 
	 For many, this is the reason they hold, buy, and admire Bitcoin. Since it can protect them from a debasing currency in many similar ways as gold can. 
	 However, Bitcoin differentiates itself from gold. Gold, for example, is not a highly prized technological innovation like Bitcoin. Due to its unique capabilities as a digital currency, it is effectively more portable, easier to access, and “can” potentially work as a payment system. 
	 To this day, Bitcoin allows people to send money directly, P2P, from sender to receiver. Bitcoin is verified by miners (who are specific participants in the network) all over the world, and the data (the information registry, which is the blockchain history) is downloaded and updated by nodes (computers) all over the world as well. 
	 
	 This graphic visualizes hypothetically how miners are distributed all around the world. 
	 This is how the information cannot be changed or manipulated. If you change your copy of the registry, it will not match the majority of other downloaded copies and will be excluded from further updates. This is the basics of blockchain technology, something that has been said to be "the most important invention since the internet.” [ 16] 
	 This information registry is publicly available for everyone; hence, Bitcoin is in no way a private monetary system. It is transparent and traceable, contrary to the narrative about Bitcoin in the early days. For privacy enthusiasts, Bitcoin is basically a nightmare. 
	 It is a fully automatic system that works by itself and cannot be turned off or taken down. It is a system that everyone can participate in it with the same rules for everyone, and due to this, the people have adopted it. Like this, it has revolutionized the world of digital money. 
	 Understanding Bitcoin is the first step in understanding cryptocurrencies. Bitcoin is a distributed network of information. The information is usually the transactions from users (for example, payments), and it is this information that is copied to individual nodes, updating the one and same registry. The updates are done sequentially; hence, transactions are put in blocks and verified every 10 minutes, one after another. 
	 When you send a transaction on the Bitcoin blockchain, you also pay a fee to the miners who process the transaction for you and make sure it is “sent” to the recipient. Through the miner, it can be received on the other end and update the entire system’s registry. 
	 What Is Bitcoin Mining? 
	 Bitcoin mining is the process by which new Bitcoins are put into circulation. (Bitcoin's circulating supply is capped). It is also how the network confirms recent transactions and is a critical component in blockchain maintenance and development. "Mining" is performed using sophisticated computer hardware that solves an extremely complex mathematical problem. This sophisticated "problem" is just a very big number or letter combination. Each computer guesses the number as many times as it can with its computing power. Miners work to guess this number combination correctly. According to the computer's CPU (Computer Processing Power), it will be able to guess only so many times a second. The first one to guess correctly gets the reward, and it is this miner that processes the blocks into the blockchain. 
	 
	 This graphic depicts a hammer that slashes numbers. A metaphor for how miners use computing power to guess a specific combination. 
	 Mining is also a term derived from the process by which people dig for gold. When gold enters the market, it has been dug up by miners in the ground, looking for the gold and essentially guessing where it is located. If done for a long enough time, miners would find gold and then sell it to the market. 
	 In the same way that people are “mining” for gold in the ground, miners are essentially “mining” for Bitcoin through an algorithmic puzzle. They use their power as computers to solve the puzzle and receive BTC in reward for doing so. The miner who successfully solves the puzzle by guessing the number/letter combination enough times adds the block of transactions to the chain, and after this, the process begins again. 
	 BTC is a ticker or symbol for Bitcoin. In the same way as ETH is the ticker for Ethereum. 
	 Blocks are limited to a specific time interval called "block time." The block time in Bitcoin is set to 10 minutes, and no blocks can be added sooner than that. 
	 So, the first computer to find the solution or answer to the puzzle (the number/letter combination) adds the following block to the “chain” (“like releasing the gold to the market”) and receives the BTC reward. 
	 To understand this network, you need to understand the mission behind creating it. Satoshi created a system that operated by itself where participants were incentivized to work for a reward. Like that, one single authority was not responsible for the work. Through this kind of mechanism, whereby miners use their computer power to get rewards for it, there will always be an incentive for people to join the network so that the network remains decentralized instead of centralized. 
	 Satoshi wanted all other nodes to know about your transaction. The rationale is that your transaction's likelihood of being recorded on the blockchain dramatically increases if it reaches many block producers. If your transaction only reached one miner (or a small set of colluding miners), it would be possible for them to leave your transaction in their mempool(s) and never add it to the chain. Your transaction could be ignored if the miner(s) so chose, and you would have been effectively censored. This would be a failure for the blockchain since it would lose the fundamental qualities of openness (allowing anyone to use the blockchain) and censorship resistance (no one can censor users' transactions). The blockchain will eventually add your transaction if it was broadcast to several miners who are bidding to add it to the chain for cash (they take a transaction fee). The miners receive transaction fees from the network that users pay and Bitcoins that are introduced to the circulating supply through steady and gradual token emission/issuance (working as rewards to miners). 
	 Token Emission 
	 Token emission is a process in cryptocurrency where tokens are introduced into the circulating supply for several purposes. With Bitcoin, it is to reward miners who are securing the network. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us the Bitcoin Inflation over time. With 21 million being released by 2040. Alternate source: https://buybitcoinworldwide.com/stats/inflation/ 
	 The token emission graph shows an example of an aspect of the tokenomics of Bitcoin: token issuance. The token issuance, which is the release of new Bitcoins into the market, directly affects the price. However, it serves a noble purpose. 
	 Newcomers to crypto tend to confuse the aspect of price with cryptocurrencies, thinking that a given asset is cheap because the price seems to be low. However, that is not the case. Price is calculated by taking the market cap (which is the total dollar invested into the asset) and dividing it by the number of tokens in circulation (tokens available in the market). Some tokens may have one hundred times more tokens than other cryptocurrencies. This results in a seemingly "cheaper" asset. 
	 As an example: 
	 $100,000 / 100 tokens circulating supply = price per token $1,000 
	 $100,000 / 10,000 tokens circulating supply = price per token $10 
	 Tokenomics 
	 Tokenomics is a term that combines the words "token" and "economics." It has a similar definition to economics. The study of tokenomics aims to study cryptocurrencies' supply and demand characteristics. Specifically, the creation, transfer, and destruction of these digital tokens. Essentially, tokenomics are the policies relevant to a specific token or cryptocurrency. For example, issuance rates (tokens introduced to the open market [circulating supply]) and burn rates (removal from circulating supply) may be preset in the code. 
	 
	 This graphic shows Bitcoin's complete tokenomics. How the relationship is between users, the market, and the miners. 
	 When studying tokenomics (the token economics of a given cryptocurrency), you are looking at an overview of all the factors that can impact the price of that specific asset. How miners, system participants, eventual smart contracts, and the network operate in symbiosis. 
	 The illustration above gives you an overview of the tokenomics of Bitcoin. You have the user, and the market the users occasionally buy or sell from. The miner gets paid in transaction fees and the new tokens emitted by these miners. 
	 A Verification System 
	 Bitcoin is all about verification. How can we verify that the transactions have been done without central actors needed for this job? 
	 When a user is sending a transaction, they pay the transaction fee. Let’s say they pay $10 in fees for a $1,000 valued BTC transaction. This transaction would go into a block together with other transactions (filling the block to the capped size). When the block is full, a miner would then take the job of processing this block into the blockchain. The miner uses their computing power, and in turn, they are the one who gets the $10. Simple and effective. 
	 Since there are miners all over the world and since the miners are all competing with the same set of rules to verify transactions, this becomes a decentralized network of computers all around the world without a single authority over the network. As you see, this is a very beautifully designed computer network, almost mimicking how gold works, but being even better. 
	 What Is a Node? 
	 In the Bitcoin network and almost all cryptocurrency networks, nodes play a particularly important role. A node is a computer connected to other computers that follow rules and share information. A "full node" is a computer in Bitcoin's P2P network that hosts and synchronizes a copy of the entire Bitcoin blockchain. The nodes are not always miners, but just computers that have downloaded the copy of the blockchain registry. Nodes are essential to keep a cryptocurrency network running. 
	 Hence, Bitcoin is not just a “digital currency,” it is a network of computers all over the world that all download and register the same copy in the registry. They update each and every transaction going on to the same registry. This registry functions according to a set of rules, and one of these rules is the block size. The information needs to be processed one block at a time, so in order for this to be efficient, there needs to be a certain limit to how much information can be processed at once. 
	 Are There Any Risks? 
	 As they say: “Everything can be hacked.” 
	 In Bitcoin's case, to be “hacked” or for someone to take over the network, they would have to have control over 51% of the processing power (or funds in PoS) in the network. All the computers combined in the network are the ones that direct it in many ways. When there is a large distribution of large miners, it is hard for one to take over 51% of the entire power. If there are many small miners, one big one can take over the entire network. By having this power, anyone could force their blocks into the blockchain and theoretically create their new chain. 
	 When a 51% attack happens, the network will then have two copies of the blockchain, each with a separate set of new blocks, and will be unable to decide which version to adopt as the true one. 
	 Typically called “Majoritarian attacks,” this is the most dramatic attack method on a Proof of Work (PoW) or Proof of Stake (PoS) network. In today's world with Bitcoin, this is extremely hard to do and likely impossible since the computers and processing power required would be tremendous. Like this, Bitcoin has become one of the biggest digital currency information registry networks in the world, also perhaps the most secure one. 
	 Is Bitcoin Immutable? 
	 An important aspect of Bitcoin’s success and perceived functionality is its immutability. Immutability is a highly acclaimed quality that supports the blockchain's security and transparency and, as a result, ensures transactional integrity. The immutability of blockchains is because the transaction data is tamper-proof. It cannot be altered or be changed. The history will forever be recorded on the blockchain. This is the main characteristic that makes it a trusted data registry system. However, this is not 100% true. 
	 This book is a comprehensive overview intended to give you a real insight into crypto. It is not a subjective approach where I write from an ideologically convinced perspective. Therefore, it is necessary to also include points in Bitcoin's history that don’t necessarily go in favor of the hyped narrative. At least, immutability is a part of the blockchain narrative. The truth is that two of the most well-known blockchain networks in use today have turned their “immutability" around. That does, in fact, include Bitcoin. How and why did these blockchain communities change their "immutable" history? With Bitcoin, it happened back when Satoshi was still around. 
	 The majority of Bitcoin users are aware that there are only 21 million coins available in total. The cryptocurrency's success as sound money or "digital gold" depends on this design. Anything that poses a threat to this feature poses a genuine risk to the value of Bitcoin. On August 15, 2010, the overflow problem in Bitcoin did just that. An unidentified hacker created 184 billion Bitcoin on an earlier blockchain version without engaging in any mining. This was 8,784 times as many Bitcoins as there should actually be. According to research by Bitcoin developer Jeff Garzik, two Bitcoin addresses received precisely 92,233,720,368 coins at block 74,638 due to a bug. Thankfully, the error was promptly fixed. First, within three hours of the problem being discovered, Bitcoin's anonymous creator, Satoshi Nakamoto, published the code to repair it. Then, before the day was done, he quickly worked with Gavin Andresen to produce Bitcoin version "0.3.1." 
	 This update was a "backward-compatible soft-fork" that was carried out prior to block 74,638. As a result, the promotion reversed all transactions made after 184 billion Bitcoin were produced while also fixing the flaw. The choice was only essential to go back into Bitcoins previous history and get an all-in-all agreement between the operators of the system to reverse the blockchain. (A similar thing happened with Ethereum during "the DAO hack" in 2016.) 
	 Reverse the blockchain?… Wait a minute… 
	 Isn't it the narrative that Bitcoin is completely immutable? 
	 Well, yes, it is until the majority of the contributors (or most influential ones) decide that it's not going to be that anymore. They did, however, decide it for a good reason. The excessive wealth concentration it produced would have undermined Bitcoin's ability to serve as money if the vulnerability had not been fixed and reversed. Furthermore, the blockchain's simple record of the transaction would have destroyed all trust in the asset. This was drastically necessary to prevent a catastrophic failure of the entire network. It was also feasible due to several factors not being applicable anymore. 
	 The fact that the Bitcoin community was small at the time and the nature of the danger contributed to the speedy implementation of a solution. At the same time, it helped that Satoshi Nakamoto was available for a quick implementation of the solution. This also shows how Bitcoin was more centralized at the start, since Satoshi had a key strategic role in solving this issue. 
	 It is things like these that may keep someone on-edge. 
	 Bitcoin is “immutable,” until people choose that it's not. However, these special instances where the entire network agrees on a solution to counter a specific disastrous problem are not bad. In my opinion, it does not alter the immutability aspect of Bitcoin. In many ways, it shows how humans can cooperate to maintain the system. Where abnormal decisions are made only to protect the majority. 
	 Scalability 
	 Scalability is defined as the ability to meet the demands of an ever-growing user base. Today, many people are of the opinion that Bitcoin has scalability issues. This is not for nothing. Sending a transaction on the Bitcoin blockchain is increasingly costly and takes several minutes to be confirmed. The blockchain can only handle 5–7 transactions per second (TPS), and this results in a waiting time for transactions to go through, among other things. 
	 Understanding the scalability issue of Bitcoin 
	 The issue of scalability with Bitcoin is inherently tied to the size of blocks in the blockchain. Each block contains information (transactions). The bigger the size of the blocks, the more data it can contain and, thus, it also can improve on transaction time. 
	 There are several arguments for and against increasing the block size of Bitcoin. The big block size may give the blockchain increased TPS. However, it would result in lower fees, resulting in a lower incentive for miners to secure the network. This would make the network more centralized and less secure. [17]  Increasing the block size would also result in higher costs for running a full node. [18] 
	 This led to early disagreements within the Bitcoin community. In 2017, as the issue grew increasingly serious, the question then was: More TPS or a potentially “more secure” network? 
	 The maximum block size is expressly stated in the Bitcoin “protocol.” A maximum block size of 1 MB is allowed, with a general requirement of 10 minutes as block time. However, Satoshi expressed the opinion that the Bitcoin block size could be changed later if needed. [19] 
	 The actual requirement of the block sizes was significantly smaller than 1 MB at the time Satoshi was around, and Satoshi didn’t think that data-filled blocks would ever become a problem. Additionally, new problems could occur if the block size were increased drastically. [20] 
	 Today's average Bitcoin transaction time is 7 TPS due to these limitations (1 MB). A group of miners, investors, and activists forked the Bitcoin network in the middle of 2017, ending the discussion. Bitcoin Cash was founded as a newly created fork, and the block size limit was increased from 1 to 8 MB. Then, to meet its users' demands, Bitcoin Cash continued on a path where they would frequently raise the block size. This event in Bitcoin's life cycle was called "The Block Size Wars," and until this day, there is a lot of controversy around what actually happened and the nature of the events. 
	 Visa as a payment system can handle roughly 1,700 TPS, [21]  while other sources mention 47,000 TPS. [22]  Blockchains like Ethereum can only process 20 TPS, however it will drastically increase with the update called Ethereum 2.0. Even so, this is substantially higher than Bitcoin today. Bitcoin Cash processes 300 TPS. [23]  While the exact number can change, Bitcoin Cash is currently numerically superior in terms of TPS than both Ethereum and Bitcoin as of August 2022. 
	 The narrative of Bitcoin as a digital payment system died a long time ago, while it is the narrative of digital gold that currently rules. If you compare Bitcoin with the previous inventions for digital money (the ones before Bitcoins arrival), Bitcoin is the winner. On the other hand, there has been tremendous innovation since Bitcoin appeared on the scene. Many new features and capabilities have been introduced through the innovation within the space. 
	 Developers working on Bitcoin figured out that the blockchain does have scalability issues. Because of this issue, the lightning network was born to facilitate for transactions that are cheaper and faster, typically like payments. 
	 Lightning Network 
	 The first decentralized digital currency in the world, Bitcoin, is accessible from any location with an internet connection. However, scalability problems and transaction costs prevent Bitcoin from being the most cost-effective method of sending and receiving money. The Lightning Network (LN) is built on top of Bitcoin. It is explicitly designed to scale the Bitcoin blockchain, enhance its functioning as a medium of exchange, and position itself as an answer to these problems. 
	 All LN transactions occur on this off-chain network that is constructed on top of the Bitcoin blockchain. Since the blockchain itself is Layer 1, the protocol is regarded as a Layer 2 solution. 
	 The two parties (usually a buyer and a vendor) open a "bidirectional payment channel" using the LN rather than adding each individual payment to the blockchain. The parties must opt to start a payment channel where they can transfer money back and forth from one another's wallets to establish a bidirectional channel. Both sides must fund the establishment of the channel with an on-chain Bitcoin transaction for it to work. The maximum amount of money that can be sent is the whole amount of the payment channel, preventing both parties from losing more money than necessary. Since these transactions take place off-chain on the second layer, the Bitcoin network does not need to confirm them. They consequently happen instantly through a smart contract, providing much lower fees and throughput. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us how the Lightning network (LN) can be visualized. 
	 Payment channels allow two untrusted parties to move money back and forth without clogging up the main chain. They are off-chain P2P tunnels. Channels are designed for short transactions, like using Bitcoin to buy a coffee. For instance, after forming a channel between a client and a store, the two sides can quickly give each other an unlimited amount of Bitcoin for a small transaction charge. Hosting minor transactions off-chain frees up space on the main chain for bigger transactions because Bitcoin miners often approve bigger transactions to get bigger rewards. Smaller transactions used to take hours to validate before payment channels because miners found little value in them. [24] 
	 Locking up funds in payment channels is not a viable long-term solution to the scalability problem. The network will continue to be clogged up with the same amount of TPS on the main chain (the original blockchain). 
	 Since Bitcoin is "open source," meaning that the code is open for everyone to see and modify, the code has been used to create new projects with minor tweaks and changes. This has certainly facilitated for innovation, but this innovation was not "on" Bitcoin itself. It was new projects creating their own blockchain. 
	 Since many cryptocurrencies have their own blockchain, they are considered competitors to Bitcoin. These other cryptocurrencies are called “Altcoins.” They are alternatives to Bitcoin, with new approaches to the same problems that Bitcoin tried to solve or alternatives that actually focus on solving entirely different problems. Altcoins are an even bigger topic than the topic of Bitcoin itself. 
	 Let's dive into the next chapter, which is exactly about this. 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Chapter 3:  Altcoins, the “Alternatives” 
	 What Does “Altcoin” Mean? 
	 “Altcoin” is a term short for “alternative digital currency to Bitcoin.” [ 25]  Basically, all other coins or cryptocurrencies are called “altcoins." You see, today, crypto is not just about Bitcoin and decentralized digital transactions anymore. Although Bitcoin has been the most important technology for crypto to spring forth, newer inventions may arguably be just as influential. Digital transactions without the need for third parties were the most critical problem, and Bitcoin solved just that. Now it has set forth a sea of innovation where one seeks to decentralize new things like decentralized social media (DESO protocol), decentralized exchanges (Uniswap), decentralized loan services (MakerDao), and much more. 
	 When Bitcoin was first introduced, a few people were present on the online forums where discussions were taking place. Following the evolution, more and more people became involved and enthusiastic about this digital currency idea. The idea of a digital currency had already been planted in the minds of most people, introduced through literature, movies, and TV-series talking about the digital future. However, few could predict the ramifications and details surrounding Bitcoin. Since Bitcoin was open source code from the very start, anyone could take this code and create a new cryptocurrency with minor modifications. Even after the second year of Bitcoin's arrival, new cryptocurrencies arrived on the scene. Some of these focused more on privacy while others on other aspects of finance. Some didn't like the decisions being done by developers working on Bitcoin, while others envisioned a completely different digital currency system. 
	 The First Altcoins 
	 The first cryptocurrency to arrive on the scene (after Bitcoin) was called Litecoin. 
	 Litecoin (LTC) is an alternative cryptocurrency created in October 2011 by Charles "Charlie" Lee, a former Google engineer. Litecoin was adapted from Bitcoin's open-source code but with several modifications. Like Bitcoin, Litecoin is based on an open-source global payment network that is not controlled by any central authority. Litecoin differs from Bitcoin in aspects like faster block generation rate and use of Scrypt as a proof of work scheme. It is considered to be among the first altcoins, derived from Bitcoin's original open-source code. [26] 
	 Litecoin was created as a faster blockchain payment network, intended to be the “silver to the gold.” After Litecoin, many more cryptocurrencies arrived on the scene. 
	 
	 Here we see the first Altcoins that came into existence with a brief description on what they do.   
	 The graph shows the first altcoins that arrived during the early years of the crypto industry, and as of today, we have around 20,000 cryptocurrencies according to CoinMarketCap. How did the number of cryptos become so high? What happened in the space that enabled the creation of so many "different" cryptocurrencies? 
	 Although this number is remarkably high, these are all not uniquely individual cryptocurrencies. Fundamentally, cryptocurrencies can be broken down into just being code. This code can be copied and republished under new names, creating a new cryptocurrency. 
	 EC20 Tokens 
	 At the same time, with the advent of Ethereum's token standard called "ERC20," it became increasingly easier to launch and create tokens, essentially cryptocurrencies on Ethereum blockchain with a few tweaks of code. According to CoinLore's database, there are 4,099 registered ERC20 tokens, representing 25% of all cryptocurrencies in existence. 
	 ERC-20 is a technical standard used for smart contracts on the Ethereum blockchain for creating tokens. It includes a list of rules tokens must comply with. There are 4,099 tokens at this moment in the base, with a total market cap of around $327 billion. 
	 This shows how influential Ethereum has been in the crypto space since it has set forth the standard for token creation. Through Ethereum's unique technology, it has facilitated innovation and adoption. In the next chapter, we will see how Ethereum made all this possible and became the second biggest blockchain in the world. 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Chapter 4:  Ethereum, a New World Is Opened 
	 Ethereum was created by Vitalik Buterin and codevelopers. At the time of Ethereum’s creation, Buterin was 19 years old. Having a father that was a computer scientist [ 27]  and himself being highly gifted at a young age, he had the prerequisites for being a talented cryptographer and programmer. Arguably, after Bitcoin, Ethereum is the most important cryptocurrency invention. This is because Ethereum fundamentally changed the entire crypto industry and opened new doors of innovation. In this chapter, many new terms will be introduced, but bear with me as I try to explain each one of them. 
	 Ethereum has taken what was a four-function calculator of a programming language in Bitcoin and turned it into a full-fledged computer.  —Fred Ehrsam 
	 Ethereum which is said to potentially be the most important invention after the internet, [28]   introduced something called the EVM, “Ethereum's Virtual Machine,” which is able to perform “Turing complete smart contracts." 
	 Here are three terms that need to be explained: Virtual Machine, Turing Complete, and Smart Contracts. 
	 Virtual Machine : A computer resource that uses software instead of a physical computer to run programs and deploy applications. [29] 
	 Turing Complete : A term taken from the computer pioneer Alan Turing. During the early generations of computers, Alan Turing explained that there would one day be a machine that could solve any problem. This machine became known as the "Turing Machine." This machine could hypothetically answer all computational calculations. Suppose a programming language is "Turing complete." In that case, it means that it duplicates the Turing Machine by being able to run any program and solve any calculation that the Turing Machine can solve. 
	 Smart Contracts : Smart contracts are the revolutionary blockchain program capability that lets people create applications tied to the blockchains. These applications are self-executing and autonomous. Within the code, there is a set of rules that has a small chance of being altered later. Smart contracts were first proposed in 1994 by Nick Szabo. The revolutionary aspect of smart contracts, facilitated through a VM, is that they also remove middlemen from applications and web interactions. People put their trust in verifiable and usually open-source code connected to the blockchain, instead of people and changeable software. 
	 This sets forth an entirely new use case for blockchains. Through smart contracts, any application can be deployed and created on any blockchain with a VM. This has the potential to restructure the entire internet of applications and web interactions, a narrative that has been called Web3, but more on that later. 
	 What Exactly Is Ethereum? 
	 Ethereum is a decentralized blockchain founded by Vitalik Buterin. The blockchain establishes a P2P network that executes and verifies transactions, as well as application code called "smart contracts." Smart contracts are, among other things, something that has revolutionized cryptocurrency and led to a sea of innovation. It allows the participants to act and carry out activities with each other, without the need for a central authority to carry out and oversee the activities. [30]  Smart contracts have predefined rules that cannot be changed. This also makes them safe and reliable. In addition to being immutable, verifiable, and securely distributed over the network, it gives the participants full ownership and insight into the transaction data. 
	 Transactions are sent from and received by user-created Ethereum accounts called "wallet addresses." A sender must sign transactions and use Ether (ETH), Ethereum's original cryptocurrency, as a fee to process transactions on the network. Like this, Ethereum has become one of the largest blockchains in the world with a huge market capitalization because 25% of all altcoins are on the Ethereum blockchain and created as ERC20 tokens. 
	 Market capitalization is the amount of dollars or value of a given asset. With cryptocurrencies, the price of a crypto is calculated by taking the market cap and dividing it by the circulating supply. 
	 There are differences in circulating supply and total supply. "Circulating supply" is the amount of tokens available in the open market. Total supply is the supply that will ever be available or that can ever be introduced. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us the complete (old) Ethereum tokenomics. The relationship between users and the market, miners, and token burns. 
	 The architecture of Ethereum is remarkably similar to that of Bitcoin. It also uses a PoW consensus process in its current form. Ethereum's utility is increased through smart contracts, and a large ecosystem of decentralized applications (DApps) has grown and generated significant transaction volume. The illustration above gives you an overview of the tokenomics of Ethereum 1.0. You have the user, and the market the user occasionally buys or sells from. The miner gets paid in transaction fees and the new tokens emitted by these miners. Added here, you have the aspect of Genesis supply since Ethereum is not hard-capped, as well as the implementation of EIP1559, which includes token burns making Ethereum deflationary. 
	 Most cryptocurrencies either have a fixed supply known as being “hard-capped,” or not. If the cryptocurrency is hard-capped, it means that the number of tokens that will ever exist is predefined in the token smart contract and can’t be changed. Like this, the value can’t decrease more than what everyone is aware of from the start through checking these usually public tokenomics. Suppose it does not have a fixed supply, being hard capped. In that case, the founders and developers can increase the circulating supply at any given time by essentially “printing” more tokens into the market, which will lower the price. 
	 Ethereum does not have a fixed supply; however, this has not stopped people from investing in it. For Ethereum, it is likely done to be flexible for whatever the future holds. When the founders of a cryptocurrency are competent, this may not be an issue; for other projects, this can be an issue since they could potentially ruin their project if they don’t know what they are doing. 
	 Much of the basis of Ethereum's extreme popularity is due to its unique EVM, the blockchain software platform. It can be said that this is what drives Ethereum's large user base because it is precisely this that allows developers to create DApps together with the blockchain as the verification system. Essentially, Applications built on the EVM are called DApps, but DApps are not limited to Ethereum, and can be built on multiple blockchains like Solana and Polygon. 
	 The EVM has introduced a way where blockchain technology can be further used to create use cases for people. It has led to a sea of DApps and DEXs (decentralized trading platforms) on the Ethereum network. Programmers and users value the EVM because it has no downtime and keeps all created objects safe from changes. 
	 Examples of successful DApps on Ethereum that have become incredibly popular are Uniswap, MakerDAO, and OpenSea. 
	 Uniswap is a Decentralized Exchange. 
	 MakerDAO is a decentralized lending platform. 
	 OpenSea is a centralized NFT marketplace. 
	 These are some of the most used applications, first built on Ethereum. These applications can also be deployed on other blockchains that have a similar deployable Virtual Machine. Like this, we see many applications being on several blockchains like Solana, Polygon, and Avalanche. 
	 Quite obviously, Ethereum has revolutionized blockchain technology as no other blockchain has. On the other hand, the popularity and the architecture have led to high traffic and costly transactions. Ethereum's transaction cost is based on capitalist principles. This means that the more you pay to get the transaction through in the network, the more you will be prioritized. The participants can pay more and get in front of all others. This, in turn, leads to a higher price for transactions. (It's also because Ethereum has a maximum number of TPS, driving the demand higher to get the transactions through than miners available to do it.) 
	 
	 This graphic shows us an example of the change in Ethereum Gas prices over time. 
	 In periods where Ethereum experiences a lot of activity, it happens that Ethereum's "gas fees," i.e., the transaction costs, reach $40–100 per transaction. This can easily be checked on sites such as         https://www.ethereumprice.org/gas 
	 This has happened due to the scalability issue that Ethereum currently faces. Scalability, in this sense, means the ability of a given blockchain to meet the increasing demand of a growing user base. Since Ethereum can't increase its TPS (before ETH 2.0), users suffer from similar problems as a user on Bitcoin. Just as the LN was built on Bitcoin, Ethereum has seen tremendous increase "Layer 2" scalability solutions. 
	 Ethereum Layer 2 
	 
	 This graphic shows us how Layer 1, Layer 2, and DApps on Ethereum can be visualized.   
	 The Ethereum Layer 2 (L2) solutions are currently much more varied than on Bitcoin. Multiple approaches to this day are actively being developed to reduce the transaction time and increase TPS, throughput, and scalability. These scaling solutions also reduce the congestion on Layer 1. 
	 These different Layer 2 scalability solutions (without going deep into each one) are named "Rollups," "Optimistic Rollups," "Plasma," and "Sidechains." Each has a unique approach to solving the scalability problem of Ethereum and thus has a distinct relationship with Ethereum. My favorite is ZKrollups, a unique Rollup approach that preserves privacy as a L2 on top of the transparent Ethereum blockchain. 
	 Rollups execute transactions outside Layer 1, publish the data where consensus is obtained, and then do the transaction execution. Due to the inclusion of transaction data in Layer 1 blocks, rollups benefit from Ethereum security. [31] 
	 There are two distinct rollup kinds, each with a unique security model: 
	 
	 Optimistic Rollups believe that transactions are genuine by default and only perform computation when there is a challenge, uses a fraud proof. 
	 Zero-knowledge rollups do off-chain computation and then submits a validity proof to the chain. 
 
	 In other words, Rollups are scalable because they consolidate numerous transactions into one transaction, compressing original transaction data, and allowing them to handle more TPS. 
	 A sidechain is an independent EVM-compatible blockchain that runs parallel to mainnet (the Ethereum blockchain). Sidechains are independent blockchains, meaning they need their own consensus mechanism and validators to agree within their network. This also makes it less secure in relation to Ethereum. Sidechains are compatible with Ethereum via two-way bridges and run under their consensus rules and block parameters. 
	 Vitalik Buterin, being aware of the scalability problem, used many years to plan and restructure Ethereum Layer 1 (the mainnet, main blockchain) from PoW as the original consensus mechanism to PoS in the hope that this will solve the current issues. On September 15, 2022, the Ethereum network successfully merged and it introduced a drastically new Ethereum network. An environmentally friendly one that reduces the world's electricity consumption by 0.2% according to Buterin. [32]  This sets the stage for the future implementation of sharding, taking place in 2022. Sharding or "sharded chains" will optimize its network by adding many different shard chains functioning as mini blockchains to add scalability to the network to thousands of TPS. 
	 Before we go further down this whole rabbit hole, let's explain what a "Consensus Mechanism" is and what it includes. 
	 Consensus Mechanisms and the Byzantine Generals Problem 
	 We talked about decentralization and what that is. You see, some of the inherent problems with previous digital currencies were that they were centralized. There was one entity that decided matters, so no one needed to agree. There was no need to get to a consensus since other participants had no insight. With decentralized blockchains (not operated by a central authority), there will always be the need for a consensus mechanism since there needs to be agreement within the network about the rules. Previously with Bitcoin, we explained the miners and how miners process the transactions through the PoW algorithm. This consensus algorithm decides who is doing specific activities within the network. For you to understand the importance of this, let's introduce a problem called the Byzantine Generals Problem. 
	 The Byzantine Generals Problem was coined in 1982 as a logical dilemma that depicts how a group of generals may have communication problems when trying to agree on their next move. 
	 The dilemma says that each general has an army, and each group is situated in various locations around the city they intend to attack. All generals need to agree on either attacking or retreating at the same time. It does not matter whether they attack or retreat, as long as all generals reach a consensus, i.e., agree and do the same thing simultaneously to execute in coordination. Failing this results in loss and failure. The generals communicate through messages forwarded to each other. The problem may arise if someone does not receive the message or if a general acts maliciously. 
	 Applying the dilemma to the context of blockchains, each general represents a network node, miner, or validator, and these need to reach a consensus on the current state of the system. 
	 Therefore, the way to achieve consensus in these types of distributed systems, there needs to be at least two-thirds or more reliable and honest network nodes agreeing on the same state of the network. This also means that if the majority of the network decides to act maliciously, the system is susceptible to failures and attacks (such as the 51% attack). The necessary factor for everything to operate smoothly is that a minimum 51% of the given network operators and "nodes" controlling the hash rate aren't malicious, agreeing on the current state. 
	 A hash rate is defined as the measure of the total computational power being used in a PoW network. 
	 Since it is doubtful that someone is able to possess 51% of the entire network's computational power, this is said to be unlikely to happen with the biggest cryptocurrencies using PoW, but not impossible. 
	 Ethereum 2.0 “The Merge” 
	 Ethereum 2.0 is the name for the new proposed Ethereum network. The transition is called "the merge" because Ethereum's new PoS consensus layer, the Beacon Chain, merges with and replaces its old PoW consensus engine that used to be the consensus mechanism of the network, securing and producing blocks. Instead of using computer power from miners, the network will have nodes and validators achieving consensus among each other from the PoS system. This will essentially create a new tokenomic model for the ETH token. Validators are people holding the minimum requirement of 32 staked ETH. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us the complete new Ethereum 2.0 tokenomics. The relationship between users, the market, the transaction fee, token burns, staking implementation, and more.   
	 So, with Ethereum 2.0, users can stake 32 ETH and become validators. They will receive rewards for doing so and can sell it on the market. The entire system shifts from PoW to PoS. Users have the added option to stake their ETH with an annual return rate. 
	 Ethereum’s developers successfully managed the Ethereum Merge, one of the most complex blockchain re-architecturing, boosting confidence in the abilities the Ethereum Foundation. 
	 Sharding 
	 Have you ever thought about how much memory a blockchain requires? The chain size of Ethereum, a multipurpose blockchain, has surpassed 1 TB. The size of the blockchain will keep expanding exponentially. This raises certain issues with the network's scalability. 
	 Let's say a new node wishes to take part in approving network transactions. In that instance, it must download every transaction that has ever been made, from the genesis block (first block) to the most recent ones. As a result, nodes employing common hardware to join the network incur a memory overhead. Additionally, because each transaction requires updating on every node, using this strategy slows down the entire network. The slower the network is, the less throughput it can deliver. Sharding is anticipated to be used to resolve this issue. 
	 When the original data is too big to fit on a single machine, sharding is a database splitting technique where the data is separated and stored on many devices. Every shard functions as a separate blockchain. Users on each shard can only conduct transactions with other users on that shard and have separate account balances from the main Ethereum network. 
	 To understand it better, picture Ethereum as if it were divided into thousands of islands. Every island can act independently and have its own features. They will need to follow some form of protocol if they want to communicate with other islands. Sharding makes it possible for that. Each shard can now retain the unique receipts for each transaction. They can always be returned to the main chain since they are cryptographically safe. This is the Ethereum developers' own answer to the scalability issues and is said to be coming in 2023. 
	 Sharding is a multi-phase upgrade to improve Ethereum’s scalability and capacity. Sharding provides secure distribution of data storage requirements, enabling rollups to be even cheaper, and making nodes easier to operate. They enable layer 2 solutions to offer low transaction fees while leveraging the security of Ethereum. [33] 
	 This will drastically improve scalability, throughput, and TPS, While the already finished Ethereum Merge, makes Ethereum environmentally friendly since it drastically reduces the computational and electricity consumption of the network. The following years we may see Ethereum dominating the future of crypto just like it has already dominated the altcoin space. 
	 Today, we gain access to "free" internet services by giving up control of our personal data. Ethereum services are open by default – you just need a wallet. These are free and easy to set up, controlled by you, and work without any personal info. —The Ethereum Foundation [ 34] 
	 The fact is that Ethereum can give us a future internet that is democratic, free, censorship-resistant, and drastically better than the monopolized internet we use today. However, there are issues concerning Ethereum at the time of writing that could destroy this beautifully painted picture. This is also due to the nature of laws, regulations, and government entities controlling affairs in a centralized manner. 
	 Ethereum Dilemma 
	 Almost any money-making service or project is set up as a company by the people running it. This is because people need to file taxes, report their income, and whatnot. The decentralized and centralized cryptocurrency projects that are actively building on Ethereum, as well as all over the crypto space, have companies behind them that need to abide by the laws, regulations, and sanctions set up by their country of residence. This has affected Ethereum and its users in many ways. 
	 Before this merge event, an Ethereum privacy-oriented project called Tornado Cash was sanctioned due to the accusation that north-Korean hackers had used it for money laundering. All addresses that interacted with this protocol were blacklisted. [35]  Any Ethereum node, miner, or validator continuing to process transactions for these addresses could be seen as breaking the law set by the OFAC regulations. This would go directly against the main narrative of crypto, blockchain, and Web3. It could also destroy the hope that the internet will be censorship-free, but there is hope. 
	 Since governments' laws and regulations only apply to their borders, nodes and validators exist outside of these borders where these specific regulations take place. Due to this, there will always be nodes, validators, or miners that do not need to abide by these regulations and can continue performing their activities for anyone. 
	 Currently, over 66% [ 36]  of the beacon chain validators (the ones committed to the Ethereum PoS) adhere to OFAC regulations (OFAC is actively demanding certain transactions and addresses be sanctioned/censored), including validators of huge centralized entities like Coinbase, Kraken, and others. The once free and “open to everyone” system is becoming a censorship-supporting machine adhering to centralized government rules. 
	 Even though this is said to counter criminal behavior, what the governments deem as criminal or bad versus what actually is bad may be two different things. At the same time, the split of validators adhering to sanctions versus those that don't can result in a fork of the Ethereum blockchain (creating two opposing Ethereum chains). 
	 The centralized actors like exchanges that amass massive amounts of money, are the ones that also have committed to staking in the Ethereum Beacon chain. Together with Lido (a DAO on Ethereum), they have the majority of control and can thus potentially influence Ethereum’s future direction, something that questions the aspect of a future decentralized Ethereum. 
	 An open internet would have to be controlled not by a single or small group of individuals but by anyone who wants worldwide. It must be unbiased, open to anyone, and decentralized in its structure. A public good. Ethereum is a step closer to a fairer, trustless, and more democratized internet, and there are people all over the world still actively pursuing this vision. But in the immediate future, it seems that Ethereum phases some issues. 
	 Independent of Ethereum, new blockchains like Solana, Near, and Kadena are also addressing scalability issues, creating blockchains for DApps and are actively working to a future that is decentralized. Web3 is the name for this, a new internet of applications that will democratize everything online. A new framework that supports democratic cooperation between humans and eliminates old power structures. 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Chapter 5:  Web1 – Web2 – Web3 
	 A once decentralized internet (how the internet was at the start) has evolved into monopolies controlling and achieving dominance with the services they provide (becoming highly centralized). In some ways, it created a robust internet infrastructure, giving billions of people access to applications. These few monopolies, being centralized organizations today, control a significant portion of the internet and make independent decisions that affect billions of users worldwide. 
	 Web3 is a solution directly addressing this, being developed, managed, and owned by its users. People, not businesses, will hold power and maintain the new structures of Web3. Here, decentralization is preferred over major tech giants monopolizing the internet. 
	 Even though the internet is widely regarded as the technological innovation that has had the largest impact on human history, the World Wide Web is still developing. Ten short years ago, the internet was a different place, which is hard to fathom now that so much time has passed. On the other hand, the process of evolution is ongoing and never finished. 
	 Bitcoin came not only to solve the digital money problem but to solve traditional finance as well. Or, put another way, introduce a new solution. Satoshi Nakamoto wanted to create decentralized digital currencies to remove the middlemen, the banks, from our daily dependence. Central banks have controlled and monopolized the previous financial technology inherent in traditional finance. This resulted in a power vacuum where the same people had certain benefits over other people. Traditional Finance or "TradFi" is a technology that has hardly evolved and has not seen any innovation in the last 40 years. [37],[38] 
	 This problem of "middlemen" resides not only in TradFi but all over the interactions on the internet, dubbed "Web2." The new era is called Web3, and is a new decentralized internet framework that has been one of the most famous narratives in 2022. 
	 Cryptocurrencies remove the middleman from financial transactions. However, outside of this, almost all our digital interactions are done through centralized actors facilitating the technology for us. In the same way, digital transactions like bank transactions or paying with a credit card or any bank card have several banks involved, serving as intermediaries. Using Amazon, Spotify, and Facebook is the same. These are examples of Web2 companies and projects that monopolize their services. 
	 Many people don't see this structure as a problem, but for crypto enthusiasts per se, this has been a problem for a long time. Although it may have been necessary at a certain point, people will always want to break free when possible. In time, people want freedom from their rulers and authorities; in many ways, we need them, but in some ways, we should not be dependent on them when we don't need to be. It is this realization that drives any revolution. 
	 This Web3 age, in which value and data may readily move across decentralized platforms with distributed ownership and control, is only now emerging. The technology is still in its infancy. Understanding the idea behind it may aid users in understanding it better. But for a complete overview, one needs to understand what the precursor to Web3 was. It is time to examine the previous generations and their differences. 
	 Let's break down the cycle of the internet and how the internet's evolution has resulted in a problem for many. A siloed and monopolized infrastructure excludes people from true participation. 
	 Web1 (1991–2004) 
	 Web1, the earliest iteration of the internet, was created with businesses in mind rather than with users in mind. Most important businesses hired computer specialists to administer the internet and carry out its use for the benefit of their personnel and business ideas. Concisely, Web1 was a content delivery network (CDN) that invited visitors to websites to view static material without having the opportunity to post their comments or ideas. 
	 Web1 was internet when it first became available. The phrase "read-only web" was coined to describe Web1 since few contributed to the material, while many read it. Most of the people who contributed to Web1 were web developers who published material and data in the form of text and photos to their websites. The majority of these were just HTML pages that had been placed on the page layout of the website. User interaction was one of the aspects of the development process that was considered the least important at the time. Instead, the developers centered their attention on providing the users specifically with content. From the early days of Web1 to the present day of Web2, the internet advanced quickly. 
	 Web2 (2005–present) 
	 Web2 refers to the version of the internet most of us know today. An internet dominated by companies that provide services (centrally controlled) in exchange for your personal data. 
	 A number of web businesses were spurred by the dot-com boom, which lasted from 1995 to 2000. Web2 completely changed the web and the industries that support it. Users can now gather, produce, and distribute massive volumes of data with just one click, thanks to this web version. The ability for users to produce content and share it across international networks is Web2's strongest feature. Web2 platforms include social media sites like Facebook and Instagram as well as other video streaming programs, blog posting, podcasts, and social bookmarking. The ease with which music and video clips are exchanged during this time is another notable characteristic. 
	 This structure of Web2 lets companies own the user’s personal data. Since Web2 companies essentially provide services for users, the usual way users access the services is by providing information about themselves and/or any sort of payment. Even if the websites did not have user accounts and log-in interfaces, they would monitor your activity and present ads from which they could profit from it. 
	 Data being kept on servers and owned by large organizations and institutions has been a common problematic thread due to the amount of power they get over the rest of us. Even if the user had originally created the specific data in question, we ultimately are not the real owners. 
	 The introduction of Web2 marked a significant shift in the landscape of the internet, and in a short length of time, it had a significant impact on the entirety of the online world. The websites that fall under this category include Facebook, YouTube, various blogging platforms, and many others just like them that generate content. But despite the fact that the internet of today is mostly about collaborating with one another and meeting new acquaintances, using Web2 comes at a cost. For the web to continue to function in the way that we all know and use it today, user data needs to be compiled, examined, and stored in a digital location. It usually comes in the form of big, centralized servers. Web2 applications are responsible for a considerable number of the data breaches that occur, because these servers get hacked, or accessed by third parties. At the same time, information about users is gathered and utilized in ways they don't know, and users have little to no control over how this information is used. To put it another way, users access free services in exchange for their personal data. 
	 Web3 (Future) 
	 The term "Web3" was coined in 2014 by Ethereum cofounder, Gavin Wood. It has gained popular interest in the last few years. In the context of blockchain, Web3 refers to DApps that run on it. These are apps that allow anyone to participate without monetizing their personal data. Some apps allow anyone to participate without the rules implemented afterward being able to be changed. 
	 Web3 is redefining relationships, power dynamics, and identity on the internet. Users are regaining power thanks to its decentralized infrastructure, which in turn frees them from giant tech platforms' constraints and invasions of their privacy. Furthermore, the big-tech corporations have access to so much of our data that they can virtually read our thoughts. In many ways, they know us better than we know ourselves. This is also dangerous. So, the move from the user-first model from Web2 to Web3 is a natural evolution for a healthy and dynamic digital world. 
	 The transition to DApps, which give users more control over identification and ownership online instead of large corporations, is the core idea behind the Web3 movement. It combines data, blockchain, and decentralized ledger technology to enable the distributed operation of websites and services without anyone monopolizing users' data and or activities. 
	 Read-Write-Own Web:  Users can not only view static websites, or get access to services and engage online, but they can now own things online, like their own identity or digital funds. 
	 Layers of Web3 
	 The phrase "future of the internet" has been used to describe Web3 by some. Even if no single entity oversees the platform, everyone may trust it since all users will adhere to the same set of rules that have been hard coded into the system. The name for these kinds of guidelines is consensus protocols. It will make the internet smarter and more dynamic. With the idea of an internet that is permissionless, open, and trustless. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us a comparison of Web2, the old/current internet against the new Web3 internet, not relying on centralized servers that store data.   
	 Compared to earlier web generations, the technology supports a more customized web experience where users have more control. 
	 Decentralization, or shifting control of data privacy away from large organizations, has been the driving force behind this entire innovation, from Bitcoin's genesis to the present-day Web3 evolution full of DApps. 
	 Decentralized Applications 
	 A decentralized application (DApp) is an application or protocol that is open source, operates autonomously, has its data stored on a blockchain (or some sort of verification), and functions without the need of a middleman. Essentially, DApps run on P2P networks and do not rely on any central server to process information. This means a single entity and users cannot control them and must place their trust in the open-source code running the DApp. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us how a Decentralized Application works, including its relationship with the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM).   
	 What is attractive about DApps? 
	 A significant advantage of DApps is that users don't have to put their trust in the owner or provider to keep their data secure and private. They are trustless as they do not rely on a third party for their operation. No one can shut down a DApp. They cannot be censored because a single authority or person doesn't control them. 
	 DApps use smart contracts on blockchains like Ethereum, which, if you remember, are "Turing complete." A smart contract can be thought of as a set of guidelines. It can establish the guidelines for actions like purchasing and selling NFTs and allocating funds to various charities. These DApps don't depend on selling user data and personal information. However, they are dependent on the blockchain and its block time. Essentially, all activities that are to be recorded on-chain through smart contracts need to wait for their transactions in a given block to be verified by stakers or miners. 
	 Due to the differences in blockchains, DApps can look entirely different from one blockchain to another. That is because the blockchain's architecture will define the characteristics of how a DApp built on top would operate. 
	 Web3 is based on four different fundamental principles: 
	 Open: 
	 WEB3's "openness" refers to the fact that it is available to all users and that open-source software is used to execute it transparently on public domains. It eliminates ruling entities like the government and large companies. 
	 Portability: 
	 Data is easily portable because Web3 primitives don't rely on centralized servers. Communities, networks, audiences, and fan bases are therefore also transportable. Web3 allows users to simply take their audience and data wherever because it does not restrict consumers to a walled garden. 
	 Trustless: 
	 Web2 frequently calls for the participation of a third party, such as the government or service providers, during transactions. Web3 creates this dependency and is therefore referred to as trustless. Users of Web3 can interact P2P. 
	 Permissionless:   
 Web3 enhances the trustless element by not requiring the transaction participants to obtain a third party's permission. 
	 Since the entire crypto innovation cycle has been about restructuring how digital activities and interactions are being done, we understand the importance of making sure the digital future we are creating serves the people's interests and not any specific elite. 
	 Therefore, Web3 is about a societal power-struggle where the people take control over the aspects that are controlling their lives, removing the control of the big-tech corporations, the banks, and the institutions that the people are dependent on. In the strictly financial sector, this is dubbed "Decentralized Finance.” 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Chapter 6:  Decentralized Finance 
	 Decentralized finance, also called "DeFi," is an essential part of Web3. It entails using the EVM blockchains to create applications for actual financial transactions without the aid of banks or governments. Arguably, this started with Bitcoin, but the term came to light after Ethereum's EVM facilitated applications that could create new decentralized financial services tied to the blockchain. In the investor market, money is being pumped into DeFi, even by traditional financial institutions that seek to be a part of this innovative wave. DeFi is looked upon as a paradigm shift, a new revolution within Fintech. 
	 DeFi is specifically referring to the financial aspect of Web3, wherein traditional financial services are provided in a decentralized manner through blockchain technology. Arguably, the main feature of DeFi is the ability to verifiably own assets on the internet, with complete control and access. Noncustodial wallets, as they are called, enable the self-custody of assets from cryptocurrencies to NFTs. 
	 The primary example of a “noncustodial wallet” is MetaMask. Noncustodial wallets are the main feature that truly makes or breaks the concept of DeFi. This feature lets users own their assets, access applications, and interact on the web in a decentralized manner. With noncustodial wallets, your assets are stored on the blockchain. You get a set of cryptographic “private keys” that give you access to the funds. Here, three terminologies need to be explained: 
	 Custodian:  A custodian guards and protects or maintains the property. [39] 
	 A Custodial Wallet:  A wallet in which a third party holds the private keys. [40]  They hold the private keys, so they hold and own the assets. 
	 Noncustodial wallet:  With a noncustodial wallet, you have sole control of your private keys, which in turn gives you control of your cryptocurrencies. You have proof that the funds are yours. While there is no need to trust a third party when using a noncustodial wallet, this also means that you are solely responsible for not losing your keys and requires that you take your own precautions to protect your funds. [41] 
	 Custodial wallets are mostly offered by centralized cryptocurrency exchanges. Users never have to deal with private keys, making things easier. Custodial wallets are typically favored by beginners because of their “ease of use.” 
	 Using custody wallets, you may rest assured that you will still have access to the funds, even if they forget or lose your password. Most of the time, your password can be reset by providers or exchanges with the help of a few security questions or third-party connections like mail. However, a noncustodial wallet user will not get access to their funds if they misplace or lose their private key. 
	 As a result of this, DeFi is a more open and unbiased financial system. At the core of the idea, it is about not restricting anyone from participation. Examples of this is decentralized exchanges which can be accessed by anyone and anywhere, as long as the user has a noncustodial wallet. 
	 Decentralized Exchanges 
	 The most popular service or application within DeFi is a decentralized exchange. A DEX, as they are called for short, enables users to swap and trade cryptocurrencies in a decentralized manner. One of the most prominent decentralized exchanges, Uniswap, offers improved platform security, openness, and accessibility. Uniswap is run without the aid of a centralized organization or business and, like everything else in DeFi, is operated by smart contracts tied to a given blockchain. 
	 They don’t hold assets on your behalf; instead, you access the platform through your noncustodial wallet, and the assets are stored on the blockchain. With decentralized exchanges, there is more trust and fewer hacks. Since users of decentralized exchanges do not have to transfer their assets to a third party that might be compromised, decentralized exchanges represent a favorable alternative for investors concerned about hacking risks. 
	 For now, a DEX does not have any requirements for identification to access the exchange. This, in turn, enables more privacy for users compared to centralized exchanges that demand clients to fill out certain information, such as Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements, when opening an account. In contrast, a centralized exchange always has KYC procedures because it is required by law and regulation due to AML (Anti Money Laundering). 
	 Since a DEX like Uniswap is run by a DAO, no central entity controls it, and fees are given to liquidity providers. Those that put their funds in liquidity pool smart contracts earn a portion of the fees from the trades that use this liquidity. This contrasts with centralized exchanges. With centralized exchanges, they are responsible for providing liquidity, and taking all the fees. A more locked-in and one-sided model. These two exchanges (today) have different target audiences and inherent differences. 
	 These two models have different positives and negatives because each has something the other lacks. A centralized exchange may be perceived as more trustworthy because it can ensure that the funds are safe with a return guarantee if something happens. It is usually more effective to scale and take decisions because the governing system is more hierarchical than a DAO that requires voting and slow decision-making. 
	 Centralized exchanges also typically have a better perceived UI/UX (user interface/user experience). They are preferred by newcomers who want things as easy as possible for them. This user group also aims primarily to buy and hold a crypto asset for longer periods than traders who actively manage their portfolios or positions. Traders are typically experienced or professional customers. This user typically trades often and has a higher knowledge barrier. This user is more valuable for exchanges since they provide much more volume to the exchange and, in turn, pay more fees. 
	 Most decentralized exchanges use a model called Automated Market Making (AMM). AMM lets users put their assets into “pools” called liquidity pools, with each asset being part of a pair. In return for putting the assets in use, when another user buys or sells an asset, they earn a percentage of the execution/trading fee the user needs to pay, having used that liquidity pool. This is called “liquidity provision” and may serve as a sort of passive income for liquidity providers. 
	 As an example, if I buy 1 BTC for dollars at a price of 20,000 in an AMM pool, I give in 20,000 dollars to one side of the pool and take the 1 BTC out of it. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us how us how Automated Market Making (AMM) pools work for the users on a Decentralized Exchange (DEX).   
	 The pool balance constantly changes due to user trading and occasionally must be rebalanced through arbitrage. 
	 In economics and finance, arbitrage is the practice of taking advantage of a difference in prices in two or more markets; striking a combination of matching deals to capitalize on the difference, the profit being the difference between the market prices at which the unit is traded. [42] 
	 In this case, arbitrage will rebalance the pool since people put in the asset, which had an imbalance due to its lower price. This, in a sense, is a “revolutionary” new model, because it minimizes the waiting time for trades as there is instant execution. Traders buy or sell directly from the pools, which are ready to be traded at any time. Since a DEX is operated by smart contracts, it’s also autonomous. 
	 AMM became popular with Uniswap and is, to this date, the biggest decentralized exchange. 
	 History of Uniswap 
	 Uniswap introduced the AMM model to the mainstream. The concept for Uniswap originated with Vitalik Buterin's 2016 proposal for a DEX that would use an on-chain (meaning on the blockchain) automated market maker with certain specialties. Hayden Adams started working on developing this concept into a usable product a year later. Uniswap launched in November 2018 after obtaining numerous awards and $100,000 from the Ethereum Foundation. [43] 
	 With Uniswap, anyone could create a market and exchange ERC20 tokens. This made Uniswap the leading exchange for projects to freely commit their liquidity and have a place where users could buy and sell against another asset. In 2020, a production version known as Version 2 was released. Version 3, the most recent version, was released in 2021. These versions come with enhanced functionalities, improving the exchange and AMM technology as a whole. 
	 AMM vs. Order-Book 
	 Opposed to the AMM model is the order-book model. A centralized exchange usually operates through this model. It lets buyers and sellers of a specific pair meet each other at the execution. If I want to buy 1 BTC for dollars at a price of 20,000, I will need to wait until someone sells the amount for that price, putting the liquidity to work. 
	 With order-book, one can also put orders to buy or sell at specific prices, called limit orders. This is also an essential form of market making or liquidity provision, but functions differently. The assets can only be used at that specific price. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us how an order-book machine works. Typically, the backbone of most centralized exchanges (CEX).   
	 In recent times (2021 and beyond), we have seen the rise of decentralized order-books. Projects like Loopring have managed to create order-book exchanges that mix what is done on-chain with off-chain. 
	 There is a tradeoff between on-chain inherent trustlessness, and centralized exchange speed and order flexibility. Protocols such as Loopring and 0x extend a solution of on-chain settlement with off-chain order management. These solutions revolve around open smart contracts, but navigate scalability limitations by performing several functions off-chain and giving nodes flexibility in fulfilling critical roles for the network. [44] 
	 Newer implementation of Uniswap like Uniswap V3 have seen added functionality to DEXs and the AMM model, whereby users also can add limit orders, but interacting with AMM pools. For the first time, liquidity providers can also provide their liquidity at specific price ranges, increasing the revenue that these liquidity providers can earn. That is because it focuses their liquidity within the ranges given. 
	 DeFi also set the stage for stablecoins. Stablecoins are tokens in a given crypto network or blockchain that has its price pegged to a fiat currency. They are called stablecoins because they are considered more stable than the volatile cryptocurrencies. It can be transferred to account on the blockchain; however, it retains a stable value since it's backed with fiat in reserves. 
	 We see that DeFi has tremendously innovative and more effective solutions for what has traditionally been done centralized. DeFi has three fundamental principles that boost financial security, transparency, open liquidity, and development potential. 
	 The Benefits of DeFi 
	 Programmability : Highly programmable smart contracts enable the creation of new financial instruments and digital assets by automating execution. 
	 Immutability : Security and auditability are increased through tamper-proof data across a blockchain's decentralized architecture. 
	 Interoperability : DeFi protocols and applications are created to integrate and enhance one another, thanks to Ethereum's modular software architecture. Projects such as Atom (Cosmos) and Chainlink are further working toward connecting blockchains together. 
	 Many of the biggest cryptocurrencies today are DeFi projects. MakerDAO is, as of today, the biggest one, according to DeFiPulse. Under this, we have many projects like Uniswap, Aave, Curve Finance, and Balancer. These projects range primarily from two different concepts: DEXs and lending protocols. 
	 Due to DeFi's perceived functionality and enhanced characteristics compared to traditional centralized finance, many people look at this as the future of finance. A future where financial applications, money management systems, and services are available anywhere. A future that makes finance more democratized and open. 
	 The biggest focus in DeFi is decentralizing previous financial services seen in traditional finance. Even though it has gained a lot of popularity, it has been referred to as the "Wild West," an emerging unregulated space. Many people think that this unregulated financial system will completely take over and that this system will survive with no regulatory insight from government bodies. No matter how much we would like this to happen, it is a naive way of thinking. Governments will regulate it, and, arguably, it has already happened. The space has undoubtedly been used for criminal activity and scams. In many ways, due to the tremendous number of hacks and frauds, regulatory insight might be the only solution to counter this so that the fraudsters and scammers that have plagued the entire DeFi space for several years can be stopped once and for all. 
	 According to Chainalaysis, 79% of all cryptocurrency scams last year came from DeFi alone, and the scammers target anyone from average joes to tech billionaires. [45] 
	 Research found that fraud in DeFi was up 600% from 2020 to 2021, topping $10 billion. [46] 
	 There is no doubt for those that have been actively following DeFi throughout 2021 and 2022, that there has been a tremendous amount of scams, hacks, and exploits within. 
	 This is also due to DeFi’s features; being open-source and transparent, everyone can view the code and find bugs or code to exploit. As well as with smart contracts that lock funds in the blockchain, but can be stolen through various methods. In some ways, the DeFi features also offer a new way for hackers to exploit it, and the space needs added implementations to enhance its security. 
	 "Decentralized apps are designed to be trustless in that they eliminate any third-party control of users' funds," said Elliptic chief scientist Tom Robinson in an official statement. "But you must still trust that the creators of the protocol have not made a coding or design mistake that could lead to a loss of funds." [47] 
	 In a usual company, when there is a data breach or issue, the CEO is usually there for swift decision-making and execution to solve the problem. With decentralized finance, a DAO usually stands responsible; a collective of people in a digital club are all invested in the same project. These people get together to solve the issue democratically. Some DAOs see decision-making being done through meetings or chats and then recording the decision through off or on-chain voting later. However, there has to be said, even in a DAO, we have the nature of leaders and followers, whereby some specific people are listened to for swift execution to their increased knowledge of the topic, almost taking the CEO role. 
	 The concept of DAOs is genuinely an additional step in Web3 that focuses more on the governance and social aspects of DeFi and decentralized projects online. 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Chapter 7:  Decentralized Autonomous Organizations 
	 Decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs) are a further development of democratization in all the different segments of decentralized finance. Traditionally, a company or a corporation is hierarchical, that is to say, that a manager or managers direct it from top to bottom. The technological distribution of power takes place with the help of programming that enables the inclusion of people in both development and governance. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us a simpler visualization of the hierarchical or centralized structure. 
	 A DAO, however, reverses this. Instead of having a pyramid-like hierarchical structure, you have a distributed or decentralized structure where voting takes place for the decision-making. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us a proposal to how a DAO operates with smart contracts and the blockchain. How voting takes place.   
	 You can imagine using a democratic voting system, verified by a blockchain and facilitated through smart contracts. You can program in the rules necessary for each specific organization, meeting the different needs of that organization while being highly automated. The only force enabling the interactions is the autonomous blockchain, on which people operate worldwide. 
	 Traditional Organizations vs. DAOs 
	 DAOs and traditional companies differ significantly in structure, transparency, voting rights, and procedures. However, the decision-making system is primarily the differentiation. DAOs use democratic ideas and combine them with technological safety nets, in contrast to a centralized organization that does all the decision-making. 
	 The four qualities that distinguish DAOs from conventional organizations: 
	 Structure:  Executive decisions are made by token holders rather than a centralized set of officials. 
	 Democracy:  Decision-making usually takes place through voting, whereby the majority decides. 
	 Transparency:  Code is open source, so anyone who wants to look at the history of blockchain transactions can access it. 
	 Rights:  Anyone with an internet connection can acquire or hold DAO tokens, allowing them to vote and participate in the DAO. 
	 With these qualities, DAOs are not suitable for every project or business. Every project or business may not be a good fit for the characteristics inherent in DAOs. For instance, MIT thinks a DAO might not be profitable because not all voting rounds are conducted with the company's best interests in mind. [48]  Another problem is that there can be code problems and errors that a human in an established company wouldn't find. 
	 In the real world, or let's say the digital world, there are living examples of functioning DAOs. The landing platform MakerDAO has contributors from different areas of the world. The developers and founders have carefully put together dozens of smart contracts regarding specific scenarios within their protocol so that every scenario that can happen is automated with specific follow-up reactions. MakerDAO is also a DApp. 
	 DAO Tokens 
	 Establishing a DAO ecosystem requires using DAO tokens, which are an essential part of the design. Many of the biggest DAO tokens and companies today are active in the blockchain industry. 
	 As well as being a decentralized exchange, Uniswap is also a DAO. The Uniswap development team announced its governance token, UNI, in September 2020 as part of efforts to create a self-sustaining and competitive DEX. This one action opened up a new governance framework and formally granted the Uniswap community control over the project's day-to-day management and development. Everyone in possession of UNI tokens has the option to cast a vote or delegate a vote on development proposals that would change how the Uniswap Protocol functions or its infrastructure. 
	 The decision-making regarding the development of Uniswap lay solely with the development team before the release of this token. The entire Uniswap network now takes such choices together as governance has been devolved to the community. 
	 To achieve this, the team created 1 billion UNI tokens to be distributed among the platform's primary contributors, which include the development team, members of the Uniswap community, investors, and advisers. 
	 Any UNI holder can propose changes or new features, and other community members can vote on them. Before being put into action, development concepts must climb a number of tiers. The proposal must be introduced to the community during the first step, known as the "temperature check," and must receive enough support to advance to the next. Here, the proposal must receive up to 25,000 UNI affirmative votes in order to be considered for further discussion. The consensus check comes in the second stage. The proposer must now facilitate a formal dialogue that will highlight the main improvements and benefits of the plan. 
	 DAO Voting 
	 Usually, a DAO voting decision happens through a type of voting contract. 
	 A voting contract is a smart contract where users can deposit tokens into a "pool," usually locking the tokens out of the circulating supply. This is the safest mechanism for voting since it usually requires a high number of tokens, essentially filtering unserious proposals. At the same time, it enables the ones who are the most vested in a project to have the most power and influence. Something which can be seen as a good or bad thing depending on your perspective. 
	 People in the Web3 space certainly believe that the future is about DAOs and that society will adopt these new ways of social interaction, benefited by technology. The vision is that more and more social gatherings and so-called "online clubs" will arise on the internet. They will put their trust in these smart contracts that are created by the community according to the majority's decision. 
	 The most fundamental method of decision-making in DAOs is "quorum voting." 
	 Quorum Voting 
	 A quorum is the minimum number of members required for a voting decision. Here they vote with one token. To pass, a plan needs a certain percentage of voters to vote in its favor. Finding the right quorum level, however, can be challenging because too little or too much of it can compromise the quality of the judgments made. Voting in a quorum is quite difficult. What is defined as a member? A wallet? Then a person can create infinite wallets and manipulate the voting procedure, similar to a Sybil Attack, which is a type of attack on a computer network service in which an attacker subverts the service's reputation system by creating a large number of pseudonymous identities and using them to gain a disproportionately large influence. [49] 
	 An answer to this has also been to add identity KYC requirements so that the DAO knows who is voting. This limits the manipulation capabilities, as randomly generated wallets holding a token is not enough. 
	 Communities are the driving force behind DAOs. Today, individuals are represented by Ethereum addresses, but this system has drawbacks. Since creating an Ethereum address is free and anonymous, the same person can frequently own a large number of Ethereum addresses and thus increase their voting power. Social DAOs would benefit from tools that allow members to identify one another securely and reliably. They would make sure that there is a foundational level of trust amongst members, which improves the environment for bringing together people who share similar interests. Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) will likely be this tool. 
	 Spruce ID is working on a sophisticated decentralized identifier and verified credential framework. Decentralized identification tries to get rid of centralized databases that keep track of identity information because they are a single point of failure that can get exploited. The fundamental concept is that a user's address, which is kept in a wallet and connected to their identity, should be used as the credential to be stored. A so-called agent can then confirm this specific credential. 
	 Relative Quorum Voting 
	 The low result highlights alternative voting processes such as "relative quorum voting," which sees a proposition approved if at least 51% of those present vote in favor. However, there are certain drawbacks to this strategy as well. A good example is BProtocol's takeover of the MakerDAO platform in October 2020. BProtocol exposed how susceptible this new democratic experiment can be by using a flash loan to borrow $7 million worth of MKR tokens to rig a vote. [50]  The tokens were then returned in the same time block after the vote. Effectively manipulating the voting procedure. 
	 Simply put, in a flash loan, funds are borrowed and returned within seconds and in a single transaction. [51] 
	 Relative quorum voting rewards token hoarders, giving them more voting power. The power in such a DAO may initially reside with or eventually transfer to a small number of significant token holders. 
	 Reputation-Based Voting 
	 Snapshot and Orange have developed a reputation-based voting system that considers a voter's contributions in response to these drawbacks. This program intends to take control away from speculators with large token holdings and reward voters based on their performance, giving active voters a portable reputation that they can use across platforms. Like this, people contributing to the project over time and are most vested in proving the work gets the most power. 
	 Quadratic Voting 
	 A governance system based on quadratic voting is known as quadratic democracy. It is expressed by the following equation: 
	 Required tokens = (number of votes) 2 
	 A member may need one governance token to vote on a proposal, but five votes may require twenty-five governance tokens. Quadratic voting creates a dynamic where a huge number of people can become equally or more influential when they vote together by avoiding the outcome of DAO votes from being decided by a small number of members with the highest token balances. Especially as the early members are the ones acquiring the most tokens for the cheapest price, but may not be active in any way. 
	 Vitalik Buterin made a diagram comparing "one dollar," comparing “one dollar one vote,” quadratic voting,” and “one person one vote.” 
	 
	 This graphic shows us the diagram created by Vitalik Buterin, depicting the three voting mechanisms.   
	 Multi-Sig Voting 
	 Multi-sig voting entails the approval of a transaction or a proposition to pass by a group of DAO members. Here, multiple members have hold private keys. The bare minimum number of key holders required for a transaction to be accepted is specified by a preset rule. Therefore, with a group of nine private keys, six key holders' votes on a decision will be sufficient to control the DAO if the predetermined rule demands a minimum of six votes for a proposal to pass. 
	 Multi-sig voting is a feasible way to find a middle ground between a centralized authority that can act quickly but can't always be relied upon and a decentralized group decision-making system that takes too long. 
	 Multi-sig voting entails the approval of a transaction or a proposition to pass by a group of DAO members. Here, multiple members have held private keys. The bare minimum number of key holders required for a transaction to be accepted is specified by a preset rule. Therefore, with a group of nine private keys, six key holders' votes on a decision will be sufficient to control the DAO if the predetermined rule demands a minimum of six votes for a proposal to pass. 
	 These DAOs function almost like representative democracies. Representatives vote on-chain and are elected by the people, or chosen by the system based on predefined parameters. 
	 DAO decision-making involves numerous trade-offs. You have to give up part of the representational nature of your choices if you want to act quickly. To protect the system from potential attacks, additional rules and complex methods must be baked into the system, which sacrifices the bottom-up model that makes a DAO so special. 
	 This area is increasingly under development and is a particularly new phenomenon. Perhaps the ultimate model will come in the future, setting the standard for DAOs in the same way that Uniswap set a standard for decentralized exchanges. 
	 On-Chain or Off-Chain Voting 
	 On-chain or off-chain voting are the two primary ways one can vote through a DAO. And there are different trade-offs for each. 
	 On-chain governance can be done with token burns or lockups. It enables a use case for a specific token, but it can be at the participant's expense. Every time you wish to vote, the participants as a whole will "lose," say, $100,000 if each vote costs $10, and there are 10,000 people in it. This is not very sustainable. However, it benefits the majority in many ways because the tokens get burnt out of the circulating supply and thus effectively move the price up. Other voting systems, such as MakerDAO, use a voting contract where tokens only get locked up for a certain period of time. Both of these are voting systems with the use of smart contracts on-chain. 
	 Off-chain voting is usually done in events where quick decision-making needs to be done. The decision is made off-chain, which can be recorded later on the blockchain. 
	 Decentralization frequently produces inefficiencies that prevent DAOs from acting quickly, preventing them from taking advantage of present possibilities or swiftly patching unforeseen vulnerabilities. Particularly in emerging, rapidly evolving, and open-source projects, DAOs may find it more difficult to compete with more centralized, hierarchical rivals due to their inability to be agile and the time and resource drain that comes with complex decision-making processes. 
	 Working in DAOs 
	 Today, DAOs are essentially online organizations. In this area, a lot of work is essentially freelance work where people get hired for specific areas the DAO considers necessary. In this organization, many, if not most, of the members are shareholders of the same project with the same interests in driving the project further. The different freelance work which DAOs usually look after is in areas like writing, marketing, consulting, graphic design, websites, programming, social media, and community management. Since regulatory bodies have not fully addressed DAOs, many DAOs hire people without any contracts, as a usual company does. 
	 Regulatory Aspect 
	 The majority of DAOs that are currently fully functional are operating in the financial sector, facilitating the trade of digital assets worth billions of dollars. Despite operating in a sector that is traditionally highly regulated, no regulatory framework exists. It has been questioned if it is even capable of regulating DAO, simply because most a DAO has no centralized responsible party. Policymakers are still trying to grasp the concept of this new online phenomenon. How should a government or state recognize and treat a DAO? 
	 A DAO has "distributed" members without any central control point of control. Like this, a DAO can not necessarily be stopped (if the DAO is set up correctly). However, people working in the DAO will have to, in one way or another, meet the regulatory requirements that will come with upcoming regulations. Whatever they may be. 
	 DAOs may disrupt hierarchical governance and replace it with a new social governance framework, but that doesn't mean they won't operate within the boundaries of laws and regulations. The decentralized nature of DAOs makes them intriguing. Can lawmakers enact regulations that ensure compliance without requiring managers to open bank accounts, file taxes, or sign contracts? Making a DAO operate like a corporation takes away much of its appeal and use. 
	 Can the DAO founders continue to promote equal, community ownership while programming smart contracts with anti-money laundering compliance in mind? These protocols will increase the credibility of the DAO and attract potential DAO adopters (including traditional organizations that could form mutually beneficial partnerships with DAOs). 
	 DAOs try to apply the concept of trust through collective human decision-making powered by smart contracts. By codifying specific procedures into smart contracts upheld by blockchains, DAOs enable independent entities to control open-source infrastructure collaboratively. The approach of hardcoding certain DAO functions as immutable smart contracts is where the term "DAO" gets its autonomous connotation. Even though the word "autonomous" is included in the acronym DAO, DAOs do lack complete autonomy. DAOs are composed of people; hence, for them to operate, users must perform manual tasks like voting, deploying code, and debating proposals. However, for smart contracts (code) to do activities, people still need to engage with them (give inputs and outputs). 
	 Types of DAOs 
	 According to Chainlink, [52]  there are five types of DAOs: 
	 Protocol DAOs  support the development and management of DApps or the infrastructure used by DApps. 
	 Investment DAOs  make and manage investments using funds located in a treasury under the DAO’s control. 
	 Cause-based DAOs  manage funds and initiatives meant to support specific causes. Cause-based DAOs are centered around achieving collective goals in areas such as philanthropy, politics, and public goods, similar to traditional organizations like charities, lobbying groups, and grant programs. 
	 Social DAOs  manage a shared social space, collectively own something of artistic value, and/or cultivate culture and events for their members. 
	 Data DAOs  develop and manage data under the control of the DAO. Data DAOs are designed around pooling users’ data or developing unique data products in order to sell it to third parties who want to use it, such as to create AI algorithms or market research. 
	 Today, a DAO's decision-making is specifically used for: 
	 
	 Approving upgrades to a given protocol. 
	 Adjusting parameters within an application. 
	 Submitting proposals for improvement. 
	 Directing protocol-owned funds. 
	 Managing leadership. 
	 To settle disputes derived from the usage of the protocol, DApp, or DAO-managed infrastructure. 
	 Determining the long-term roadmap and vision of a given project. 
	 Determining and preventing potential risks. 
 
	 Almost all DAOs contain a social layer that enables participants to interact, present ideas, and engage in open discussion. The most commonly used platforms are either specialized website forums or chat applications such as Telegram and Discord. However, the latter two are, ironically, highly centralized projects. 
	 To get an overview of registered DAOs in the crypto space, see https://deepdao.io/organizations 
	 Even though the idea of DAOs has gotten some popularity, it does not seem like it has completely caught on yet. Despite all the talk about decentralization and a new style of bottom-up governance, DAOs have issues. People are not very excited about casting their votes because fewer than 10% of members actually vote on well-known platforms like DAOStack and Aragon. [53]  At the same time, it cannot be expected that all investors or holders of a token project will actively participate. It's also the case of technical aspects that most people shouldn't vote on because they don't have the necessary understanding to comprehend what it's about. 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Chapter 8:  Decentralization: Realistic or an Illusion? 
	 Decentralization is possible on theoretical and hypothetical grounds. However, it begs the question if it is feasible in its entirety. How do we determine what level of decentralization is enough? What metrics determine when something is fully decentralized? You see, decentralization is not a constant. It is not something that is fixed because of how a given cryptocurrency is designed. A cryptocurrency can be designed to be decentralized, but even if it's designed like that, it can be centralized in many other ways or aspects. 
	 One can measure decentralization in terms of nodes or miners because single metrics like that can be easily monitored. The various blockchain networks decentralization and security depend on how high their hash rates are and how evenly distributed its various entities are (stakers/miners). However, asking the question, "How decentralized is Bitcoin?" means the question must consider all factors, not only miner distribution or hash rate distribution. If one wanted to try to find out how decentralized a cryptocurrency is, there are several ways that one could go about that. 
	 A PoS blockchain’s decentralization can be measured by the number of stake pools or validators, the distribution of the token supply across those validators, and the percentage of the total token supply that is staked. The higher the ratio of the staked token supply, the harder it is to disrupt the network. The viability of an asset as a store of value or medium of exchange may be in doubt if there is a highly unequal distribution of funds, since it may provide a small group of users with enormous control over the development of an asset's markets and protocol. Things like these are essential to measuring how decentralized a blockchain network is. 
	 With the concept of decentralization and encoding democratic principles into protocols and software, this is without doubt possible. However, the question is a double-edged sword because there are numerous aspects of decentralization. There are also numerous levels to decentralization of a cryptocurrency, a crypto application, or organization. Let’s go into the various levels of decentralization that there are in a given cryptocurrency network. 
	 The Different Levels of Decentralization in a Cryptocurrency 
	 Projects call themselves decentralized, which may be accurate in certain areas, but usually, many of them lack decentralization in other necessary measurements. For a PoW cryptocurrency to achieve full decentralization, numerous different areas need to be covered, first of all: 
	 Governance 
	 Governance is the cryptocurrency's decision-making and future evolution. The governance must be decentralized for the cryptocurrency in question to be deemed decentralized. To achieve this, a cryptocurrency needs large audience participation. This means a large number of people who are incentivized in the network are actively taking part in the decision-making processes through voting, writing proposals, and participating in discussions. Even though governance can be controversial because valuable governance comes from people with the most insights and knowledge, it still needs full participation from its token holders. 
	 There must be a fine line between the specialist's involvement and the people with less knowledge so that the DAO can run smoothly. However, this is hard to bring to fruition. Usually, a governance structure is incentivized through a common token that people within the same network all hold. The more vested you are in a project, the more "votes" or power you have, which is common in the "Delegated Proof of Stake," the DPoS Consensus Mechanism. Here, users can also "delegate" their tokens to others so that their proposal or vote gets more influence. 
	 Even though this centralizes voting power, it is arguably more effective for the future of a cryptocurrency because specific people know more than others regarding the vital strategic decisions within a network. 
	 This is only one of the aspects of a decentralized cryptocurrency. Whether or not governance is distributed among invested members of a network, and whether or not one or a few people do not run it by themselves without democratic framework. 
	 Mining/Hash Power Distribution 
	 In any PoW cryptocurrency, miners are the core of the network. They are verifying and securing it. The whole purpose of consensus mechanisms is to create decentralized verification and security methods. Therefore, the more decentralized the system is, the more optimal and secure it is. If a miner has a high degree of the total hash power of the network, it has a higher degree of control over the network. Because of this, the network will be deemed centralized, less secure, and easier to take over. 
	 Many new blockchains are especially centralized, even if the distribution is spread throughout geographical locations. That is because the same people behind the mining rigs are geographically separated (something few people are aware of but impossible to prove due to anonymity). At the same time, there may be a large distribution of miners, but the existence of a few central and powerful ones can easily control the network. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us a hypothetical example of a node network. 
	 This same aspect is inherent in PoS networks, where the stakers (Masternodes and Validator nodes) function as the miners in a similar way. 
	 Node Distribution 
	 In a blockchain, there are nodes that download a copy of the blockchain's registry. Masternodes are enhanced nodes that validate new blocks in a PoS network. Depending on the blockchain technology in use, they also have management, controlling, and regulatory functions. Masternodes were initially introduced in the Dash protocol in March 2014 [54]  under the Proof of Service scheme (PoSe). However, they can also be employed in PoW networks. Masternodes require miners to lock up a particular portion of the token to receive block rewards from processing blocks. 
	 How Do Masternodes Work? 
	 A masternode assumes extra duties in addition to acting as a server on the decentralized blockchain network. It supports and houses a complete copy of the blockchain registry. Masternodes can control voting events and carry out protocol activities depending on the characteristics of the blockchain they operate within. Typically, to become a masternode, you need a minimum set of tokens within the network. Owning a sizeable amount of collateral is necessary to run a masternode. The criteria for masternode eligibility can occasionally be too strict, further centralizing the nodes within the network due to these limitations. Each cryptocurrency program's criteria to prevent the existence of malicious nodes within the network as well. 
	 Token Distribution 
	 With every cryptocurrency comes the aspect of token distribution. ICOs and token sales are, in many instances, profit schemes. In a truly decentralized network, the token is the key to access the blockchain’s features, be it P2P transactions or the ability to become a Master/Validator node. Especially in a PoS network, the distribution of tokens shouldn’t have a high percentage of tokens in the hands of a few since this centralizes power and control. That is because most PoS systems are plutocracies. 
	 One example of this is the cryptocurrency and Layer 1 blockchain Solana, where early investors and so-called “insiders” were allocated a total of 48% of the total token amount. [55] 
	 There need to be specific reasons for the token's existence because P2P transactions do not break it anymore. A token can be a method for developers and project founders to acquire funding from the community and thereby create whatever has been promised in a whitepaper or project proposal, around that token. In this way, a token sale is a crowdfunding campaign for people all over the globe to participate in, removing the limitations of previous privatized crowdfunding. For example, selling shares of private or public companies to insiders. 
	 There is also the aspect of releasing the token to the community, specifically as an incentive for a given DAO. When the network is set up as a DAO, the token becomes a method for inclusion and distributes influence within a network. 
	 Developer Contribution 
	 The number of developers working on the asset in question also affects the level of decentralization. A cryptocurrency can make it on all the topics above, but if there are only a handful of developers, this can dramatically centralize control. They are the ones updating the network through code and smart contracts. Even if it's open source so that people can see what is going on, it could be worrying if there are very few developers contributing to an entire cryptocurrency network. However, with DApps, this is not as important. 
	 The five criteria above are mostly related to blockchain networks and not DApps. However, some of them can also be relevant there. All of these five areas are increasingly important for the achievement of a truly decentralized cryptocurrency. It is quite common that a crypto is centralized in many of these areas at the start of a cryptocurrency life cycle but gradually becomes more decentralized over time. Few cryptocurrencies manage to score highly on all of these. If anyone comes close, it must be Bitcoin and Ethereum, which can change. 
	 With DApps, the same inherent things do not apply to all. For example, an application like MakerDAO is incredibly complicated and has much more complex smart contracts to achieve decentralization and decentralized governance. Even though MakerDAO has smart contracts put in place for decentralized governance, it is still arguable that centralization affects the project. This is because of the nature of knowledge within highly technological areas and the necessity for quick execution of important decisions. (The few founders have the most valuable input.) A research paper titled "Decentralization illusion in DeFi: Evidence from MakerDAO" [56]  by students at the University of Glasgow argued that decentralization may be an illusion. 
	 Our results show that governance centralization influences both the Maker protocol and Ethereum blockchain. The main implication of this study is that centralized governance in MakerDAO very much exists, while DeFi investors face a trade-off between efficiency and decentralization. This further contributes to the contemporary debate on whether DeFi can be truly decentralized. 
	 Here, the question is brought forth regarding the possibility of actual decentralization in DeFi. Further, in the research paper: 
	 DeFi platforms showcase elements of centralization, usually in the form of "governance tokens" and power concentration to large coin-holders... Usually, these governance tokens are also tradable cryptocurrencies. The votes are weighted by the amount of governance token held by voters. In other words, governance in DAO is tokenized. Currently, DAO is the most common governance mechanism adopted by DeFi. 
	 In some extreme cases, the final decision is taken by only the core developers. For example, Bitcoin core developers once decided to lower the transaction fees without discussing with community (Gervais et al., 2014). Cong et al. (2021) discuss the issue from the perspective of centralized mining and suggest that centralized pools designed for risk sharing could act as centralization force in the Bitcoin blockchain. Though several papers provide both theoretical models and empirical evidence of governance centralization in blockchain, the literature surprisingly remains silent when it comes to centralization in DeFi. 
	 People have the sentiment that decentralization does not exist and is an illusion or a myth. Those blockchains are bound to become centralized due to factors such as "economics of scale." That is why I say that decentralization is a continuous achievement. It’s not an end goal. A project can be decentralized, but in theory you can always achieve further decentralization. 
	 Economies of scale are cost advantages reaped by companies when production becomes efficient. Companies can achieve economies of scale by increasing production and lowering costs. This happens because costs are spread over a larger number of goods. Costs can be both fixed and variable. [57] 
	 The Economics of Scale argument has been brought forth regarding node operators and miners within a blockchain network. One example of economies of scale is when miners are compelled to deal with rising electricity prices as difficulty rises. A miner must therefore expand their business to mine more effectively and create more Bitcoin to offset the rising cost of electricity and maintain a profit. The miner will keep expanding with new rigs until the ideal point, where the expense of adding another rig (the cost of the machine plus the cost of maintenance and electricity) is higher than the value of the value mined by that equipment, meaning until it's not efficient anymore. 
	 There is also an economy of scale since centralized projects are capitalizing on access to the blockchain. Projects like Infura that run on Ethereum (a software as a service company) offer access to the Ethereum blockchain, letting any application easily connect to Infura's nodes. This gives them access to the blockchain in a readable manner for their applications through APIs instead of setting up nodes themselves, which is costly, complex, and requires specific technical knowledge and maintenance. It is cheaper for them to run nodes than for smaller parties. Due to this capitalization, we have seen Infura grow and become one of the biggest nodes within Ethereum because they find it easier to grow and expand. 
	 Ethereum has private companies funding and creating network infrastructure because it is a public good and open to anyone. In the case of Bitcoin, we don't get the same commercial-scale level (volunteers only provide volunteer scale). Infura is an example of the network layer becoming monopolized or cartelized by private companies occupying positions of tremendous power in the network. These private companies run on centralized, privately owned servers like AWS, further centralizing the network. As Google and Amazon show us, IT industries tend to become monopolized. With Infura, their nodes have been said by some to process 80–90% of all transaction flows on the Ethereum network. [58]  This is a highly centralized system. 
	 For example, one of the risks that this creates is censorship due to sanctions and regulations. A centralized project run by a US-based company needs to abide by US sanctions and regulations. Infura's Denial of Service (sanctions according to the US government) was implemented, also affecting innocent MetaMask users all around the world due to a mistake when setting the limits. [59]  Currently, countries like Iran and Lebanon are affected by the sanctions. This is an increasing problem that should not be in a space that was entirely created to fight censorship, but a user anywhere in the world can choose to connect to any node service alternative to Infura and thus get around the US sanctions. 
	 When we look at the mining hash rate distribution, it appears that Bitcoin and Ethereum are quite centralized. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us an example of Bitcoin Mining Pool Distribution, September 2022.   
	 Here we see that the top 3 pools of mining hash power control over 51% of the network. 
	 
	 This graphic shows us an example of the old Ethereum Mining Pools Distribution before the merge, September 2022.    
	 The same is the case for Ethereum. 
	 These graphs give the impression that the mining industry is quite centralized. However, mining pools use a lot of individual processing power to mine blocks rather than directly owning large mining rigs. We find a different picture when we look at the computational power of individual miners within these pools. 
	 A mining pool is a group of cryptocurrency miners who combine their processing power to mine more efficiently by increasing the likelihood of finding a block and being the one to add it to the blockchain. Mining pools take a lot of the hassles and technical challenges out of the mining process. Mining pools assist both individual miners and the pools' hash rate. Anyone who wants to mine Bitcoin for money has two choices: they may work alone with their own specialized equipment or join a mining pool where many miners and their equipment combine their hashing power. Direct payouts are the most open approach for mining pools to compensate their users. In this instance, there are direct transfers from the mining pool's address to the real miners. These payments are frequently recurring, and the miner can control their quantity through the settings interface of the pool. Some pools directly pay the miners in fiat money, which is a considerably less transparent payout strategy. 
	 Analysis done by alethio [ 62]  shows that the 51% takeover would not be so easy as to control “3 mining pools,” but thousands of miners operating their pools in these networks. At least 4,484 miners [ 63]  would need to act deliberately and together in order to take down the Ethereum network. 
	 Only 1.5% of the network's actual miners (pool payout addresses) are represented by the top 4,484 miners. But they do control most of the hash rate. Figures show that 297,443 active miners are in charge of the remaining 50% of the network's mining power. Therefore, in order to take over the network, an attacker only has to gain access to the top 1.5%, the most powerful nodes/miners. 
	 Any network needs time to grow to achieve optimal decentralization. Newer cryptocurrencies will find it increasingly harder to achieve decentralization than already established ones. For example, they will also not have the same unique history as Bitcoin. Arguably, if Satoshi Nakamoto had never left the public eye, Bitcoin would be perceived as less decentralized and more centralized. The fact that he left was a strategic decision for Bitcoin to survive and get the adoption it needed. At the same time, the mystery surrounding his anonymity, who he is, or “they” are, remains something that increases interest in crypto. It is undoubtedly this mystery that has also made people increasingly interested in this specific internet phenomenon. It directly differentiated Bitcoin from the previous inventions of digital money as well. 
	 Blockchains and applications have been marketed as a sort of revolution since the start, when the visionaries adopted it. Even if it removes the risk inherent in centralized financial systems, there are still incredible risks in a decentralized crypto network: 
	 
	 Large whales can dump the price beyond recovery. 
	 Miners can be controlled, and the network can be taken over. 
	 Users increasingly rely on centralized exchanges holding custody of their funds. 
	 With self-custody wallets, users can lose private keys and thus lose complete access to their funds. 
	 MEV - front-running risks in blockchains. 
 
	 What Is an MEV? 
	 MEV stands for "Maximum Extractable Value" or "Miner Extractable Value," which is the risk of transactions being front-run and manipulation of the blockchain. It is a manipulation by miners or bots that have insight into the mempool before the blocks are recorded on the blockchain. Profits can be made by extracting value from Ethereum users by reordering, inserting, or censoring transactions on the blocks or waiting in the mempool. 
	 What Is a Mempool? 
	 The mempool (short for memory pool) is a smaller database of unconfirmed or pending transactions that every node keeps. When a transaction is confirmed by being included in a block, it is removed from the mempool. Nodes share mempool data by relaying signed transactions to each other, but there is no single mempool and few if any nodes keep the entire mempool. [64] 
	 For example, Alice wants to make a profitable arbitrage trade. She pays for the transaction route and awaits confirmation from a miner. A flashbot sees this opportunity that Alice attempts to do and copies the exact path she takes and adds their addresses instead. This lets them take the profit by making the transaction before Alice. In turn, Alice becomes “sandwiched” when the miner then sells the tokens to Alice for a profit. This is a problem in the Ethereum blockchain that has not been absolutely addressed in full and which increases power for some over others. 
	 This website is dedicated to this phenomenon:  https://explore.flashbots.net 
	 It lets us see how much value has been extracted from the MEV. A whopping $673,145,738 at this time of writing. 
	 Decentralization, an Illusion? 
	 Most individuals today believe that the development of Web3 creates a utopian society that will revolutionize all economic and social interactions. A decentralized web is an impressive concept: a network where you alone have all the power. However, no one discusses how soon decentralization is followed by centralization. Decentralization is also not a novel concept; recent history is full of examples. You are already familiar with the fact that the early web or internet was decentralized and not controlled by anyone. However, Google produced a search engine that was so innovative that it has subsequently evolved into the web's most crucial element, recentralizing it. 
	 We design decentralized infrastructures for a new world. But the world in which we live is centralized by nature. The structure of leadership, with Alpha roles and Beta roles, is inherent in the relationships of animals, called the dominance hierarchy. [65]  We want the internet to become decentralized so that other people have less control over our lives, which is a noble desire. However, I do also believe it will be continuous work and effort. Whether or not full decentralization is an illusion; core decentralized principles are inherent in these new cryptocurrency networks. Additionally, with the gradual adoption of cryptocurrencies, further decentralization will be achieved. People are working toward better solutions than what currently exists, which is a good thing. 
	 The reality is that Web3 and the decentralized internet are still only a concept and, at this point, an ongoing project. According to Gavin Wood, the individual who first used the term "Web3”: 
	 Web 3.0 will create a new global digital economy, shattering platform monopolies like Google and Facebook and developing new business models and marketplaces to go with them. [66] 
	 We all want to believe that the monopolies that run our lives can be dismantled so that the people can reign again, but the world hardly works like that. Even a cryptocurrency network or application has a huge, centralized interest backing and drives the projects further. 
	 Web3: VC-Owned or Public-Owned? 
	 Most of the "material" on Web3 is either overly utopian or idealistic. Web3 will be owned by the public, according to enthusiasts, but venture capitalists (VCs) already own them, according to Jack Dorsey: [67] 
	 You don't own "web3." 
	 The VCs and their LPs do. It will never escape their incentives. It’s ultimately a centralized entity with a different label. 
	 Know what you’re getting into…. 
	 Blockdata found that 36 of the top 100 public companies have invested a collective US$3.5 billion in 101 blockchain companies through 140 investment rounds. [68]  However, this means that these companies, being heavily invested in these networks and projects, can also capitalize on them somehow, achieving control and influence. Large venture capital firms are investing enormous sums of money in the development of this parallel financial universe, but this does not mean that they bring with them the new rules. There are new rules, and they need to abide by them. They have simply understood one principle, and that is that they will only survive if they adapt. 
	 They are willing to adapt to the new era, as long as they adapt first so they can capitalize on those who come after (but who wouldn't?). That is the name of this game, at least how it has been played up until now. Web3 is not entirely what its marketed as; however, it is still in truth, giving people new possibilities and more freedom. In the future, the decentralized economy could be driven by more than cryptocurrencies alone, but NFTs as well. With NFTs, lots of new use-cases are enabled with blockchain technology, and it can give people more direct oversight over what they themselves own. Let’s dive more into NFTs. 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Chapter 9:  Non-Fungible Tokens 
	 NFTs, short for non-fungible-tokens, reached tremendous popularity in 2021 when poorly pixelated images were being sold for millions of dollars. Essentially, you may think that an NFT is just art, usually in JPG format, but it's truly much more than that, something we will cover in this chapter. The potential is enormous when it comes to the capabilities of NFTs on the blockchain. 
	 There are numerous reasons behind NFTs' popularity. Not only did it introduce a new revolutionary use-case for blockchains, but also a new way to speculate. Before, you could only speculate on token prices and altcoins. Now you could speculate on the "value" of art and JPGs on the blockchain. Many of which are being mixed with staking contracts and even games. 
	 First, let us explain the difference between fungibility and non-fungibility. 
	 Fungibility and Non-Fungibility 
	 Fungibility describes the ability of an asset to be exchanged with another “identical” other. An example of this is the exchange of one dollar for another dollar. These two “assets” are one and the same, having the component of fungibility. However, other assets are not fungible, for example, a house or a piece of art. This is more a perceived value, and each piece is unique, with distinct characteristics. With art, each piece is made sure to be “an original,” but art often becomes copied and forged due to the lack of verifiability. 
	 NFTs are a manifestation of this, introducing the new revolutionary aspects of verifiability through blockchain technology. Everything from photos, art, music, videos, and documents can be verified on the blockchain. The content can be bought, sold, or transacted directly between people introducing effectiveness while reducing the reliance on anyone other than the blockchain. However, NFTs are a very new phenomenon, and with this, there has come lots of misconception. 
	 The misconception regarding most NFT projects today. 
	 “NFTs are stored on the blockchain” is actually a semi-wrong statement. 
	 There are several misconceptions regarding that. 
	 On Ethereum, the token contract standard for NFTs is called ERC-721. This is similar to the ERC20 token contract, which set the standard for crypto tokens. ERC-721 standard specifies how one should construct an NFT. Here there is a "token URI" field, which is an external link to a JSON file kept on an external server and is frequently not part of the Ethereum blockchain. This must be present in every ERC721 NFT contract. The metadata data necessary to describe the NFT's characteristics is contained in this JSON file. 
	 Within it is an "image field." The image field is kind of a link to the image readable from the blockchain, it is not on the blockchain itself. 
	 Why isn't the image kept on the blockchain? 
	 The blockchain could be used to store them, but the cost would be increasingly expensive. That isn't how the Ethereum blockchain is intended to work. On the blockchain, costs are associated with each action you take and each piece of data you save. I'm sure you've heard about how expensive Ethereum transactions can be today (before ETH 2.0). And the steep fee is for an application with only a few 1 or 2 kilobytes of code. 
	 If we were to keep one image on the blockchain: 
	 The cost per kilobyte (kb) of data storage on Ethereum is 640,000 gwei. 
	 The average price of gas is currently around 25 gwei (or 0.000000025 ETH). 
	 At the current exchange rate (September 13, 2022), 1 ETH is worth about $1,600. 
	 8 kb (storage for image) x 640,000 (gas/gwei for each kb) x 0.000000025 ETH (price of gas in ETH) x $1,600 (price of ETH in dollars) = $204.80 
	 $204.80 for an 8 kb image. 
	 If we estimate that a jpg file is approximately 800 kb, the cost of storing one image on the blockchain would be 100 times that. What if you wanted to store something with a high resolution? Well, the Ethereum blockchain isn't fit for that at all. 
	 (Several other blockchains are architected to address this specific issue and enable entire file storage systems tied to blockchains.) 
	 That is why most NFT collections employ this easier method where the entire file isn't actually ON the blockchain itself but is only verified by it. 
	 Various methods, such as the "decentralized" storage platform IPFS or even Arweave, are used for the actual storage of the NFT. The most well-known "Art NFTs," like CryptoKitties or CryptoPunks, all employ comparable methods. These photos are not stored on the Ethereum blockchain itself; they are hosted on these third-party but decentralized servers. The image is located elsewhere online and points to the Metadata (JSON file) linked from your NFT. 
	 What Can NFTs Be Used For? 
	 The uniqueness of an NFT is its verifiability. The fact that an image can be verified with unique characteristics to be yours online. It can enable effective verification for diplomas, certificates, documents, and contracts. As well as being a method of spotting counterfeited digital products, something which is one of the biggest problems on the internet. This has presented a complete set of areas which NFTs can disrupt. These fields and industries are: 
	 Domain industry : Each web domain is unique and cannot be copied or owned by anyone else. Decentralized domain NFT platforms could then disrupt centralized domain services. 
	 Ticket industry : Each ticket for an event is unique and cannot be copied or owned by anyone else. The ticket industry could be effectivized and potentially disrupted by NFT technology. 
	 Music industry : Music and songs have copyright where specific artists can own songs. Music producers sell their beats usually by interacting directly with a potential customer; however, this process could easily be effectivized by NFT technology. 
	 Real estate industry : Each house is unique and is, in itself, not interchangeable with another house. A house could be represented on the blockchain as a unique NFT. This would effectivize a lot of the processes in the real estate market. 
	 Gaming “asset” industry : An “in-game” asset could be unique and represented on the blockchain as an NFT, giving users access to the asset within the game if they hold it in their wallet. Instead of having assets inside the game like accessories or weapons, these assets can become a part of an entire digital gaming economy. 
	 All in all, NFTs present an opportunity for the disruption and integration of numerous different industries. It will be a work in progress to define exactly what these things will look like. Currently, an example of real-world integration with NFT technology has to be real estate. 
	 NFT Real Estate 
	 NFT Real Estate has the same efficiency and autonomization happening elsewhere in other industries. However, there is less focus on decentralization and more on removing tedious processes for buying and renting houses. A mere NFT would represent a house and could be sold on NFT marketplaces. The house would be sold or transferred from the legal entity to the buyer of the NFT. Their NFT would represent ownership of the house. People think of approaching this in many ways, but it is primarily about letting users buy houses online, effectively with minimal requirements. 
	 This technological evolution is fascinating, but there may be potentially harmful consequences for the real estate market. Some of these could be increased speculation, which would completely disrupt the entire market and create instability. This concept of unforeseen and potentially harmful effects is relevant to all new technology. That is why nothing should be fully adopted without careful consideration. 
	 The goal of many NFT Real Estate projects, like the NFT Real Estate project called Lofty, is to make real estate investing as simple as investing in crypto and stocks. This would entail a free, capitalistic real estate market with less government oversight and regulation. What would it look like if the entire real estate market were an open and unregulated marketplace full of people speculating to make money? When it comes to real estate and the housing market, government regulation can be a good thing to ensure stability and affordability. 
	 To mention some of the potential benefits of NFT real estate: 
	 Shared ownership of houses : An NFT collection can represent one specific house. This collection could have 100 individual tokens, each representing 1 percent of the total ownership. 
	 Cost-effective : Automation reduces the need for intermediaries, resulting in fewer fees that need to be paid from the user side. 
	 Time effective : The time it takes to transfer ownership can potentially be instant. However, this would undoubtedly be different depending on whether a middle party is involved. Due to the aspect of law and regulation, if a central authority were responsible, this could be more effective than if individuals took matters into their own hands. 
	 NFTs enjoyed major popularity in 2020 and 2021 due to speculation and trading of these digital artworks. This technology was also undoubtedly used for tax evasion and money laundering, because tax rates on art are substantially less than on actual assets like cryptocurrencies. People would use it to buy their own created NFT for a large amount of money from a supposed random wallet, which is their own. 
	 We can see that NFTs can be used to further connect actual real-world assets with the blockchain. It is a technology that can prove ownership of anything from art to houses. With current blockchains, all verification is on a transparent blockchain. Everyone can see who owns what by going through block explorers like Etherscan. This can prove to be an issue, since it's not the case that everyone wants their assets publicly exposed. This brings us to the next chapter. 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Chapter 10:  Zero-Knowledge Proofs and Private Verifiability 
	 Zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs) may be the most important technology, the missing piece that will lead to the mass adoption of blockchain through the new and necessary possibilities it creates. 
	 As a cryptographic and mathematical concept, ZKP is a way for a "prover" to convince a "verifier" that a statement about some specific information is true without revealing the information itself. With decades of history in computer science and cryptography, it's evolving to support private and decentralized verifiability for blockchains and Web3. In crypto, ZKP lets users prove information without disclosing the underlying data to everyone. A "verifier" cannot see the data but can verify that the proof was calculated correctly using the knowledge of a system's inputs provided by the "prover." In essence, ZKP allows users to confirm the data's accuracy while maintaining the data's privacy. 
	 Verifiability 
	 Previously in the book, we have mentioned the aspect of verifiability and how it is one of the revolutionary aspects of blockchain technology—verifying transactions, information, ownership, participation, and work. However, normally, with these blockchains, all this verifiability is due to their transparency. Information can be verified due to the data being publicly displayed and thus readable. This has worked for specific use-cases, but such a system is not fit for many other use-cases in the real world. It also raises the question of how privacy-preserving a blockchain is when about everything is recorded in a public record. 
	 The following is a typical conceptualization underlying ZKPs: 
	 Let's say you have a colorblind friend who cannot tell a red ball from a green one (and has zero knowledge about whether the balls are different colors). You must prove that the colors of the balls are different since your friend needs more than just your words to be persuaded. A ZKP approach to this issue would look like this: 
	 
	 Your companion picks up the balls and shows you which one is in each hand. 
	 The balls are then switched between hands or not behind the back. 
	 After showing you the balls, they ask you if they switched the balls or not. Giving the correct response is simple because you can tell the green ball from the red one and thus see if it changed hands. 
	 However, your friend isn't persuaded. The balls may still be the same color, and your chance of correctly predicting whether they were switched or not is 50%. 
	 If he continues this often, the probability of you figuring out whether they exchanged the balls or not each time would be lower and lower. Your acquaintance may now confirm that the balls are different colors without knowing the exact colors of the balls. 
 
	 What Can ZKPs Be Used For? 
	 The two primary categories of ZKPs today are: [69] 
	 Interactive zero-knowledge proofs:  ZKPs involving many interactions between the prover and the verifier are called interactive ZKPs. The verifier challenges the prover, who responds with arguments until the verifier is convinced. 
	 Noninteractive zero-knowledge proofs:  The verifier may only confirm the proof once, at any given time. Compared to interactive ZKPs, this kind of ZKP demands higher computational power. 
	 In the real-world applications of ZKPs, several cryptographic methods are utilized to allow the verification of a computational statement. Using ZKP techniques, for instance, a payment recipient can confirm that the payer has a sufficient balance in their bank account without learning any details about the payer's balance. 
	 Further examples of use-cases: 
	 Private verifiable voting : Through ZKPs, voting can be done on the blockchain while remaining private. At the same time, you can verify that the vote went through and was recorded. In today's democratic voting systems, a user’s right to privacy is well respected and even essential for a true and effective result. A ZKP is essential to enable true democratic voting on the blockchain. 
	 Private verifiable ownership : Imagine you want to prove to an application that you have a specific NFT. For example, confirming to Twitter that you own the NFT for your profile picture without revealing the address to Twitter or other blockchain users. This fundamental problem can only be solved through ZKPs. It enables you to prove that you own the NFT without showing the address to anyone. This information remains hidden. 
	 To understand why this is so important, imagine a corporation or company that wants to use the blockchain but does not want its data or its customer's data displayed publicly. On the internet, if the Web2 applications reveal users' sensitive data to the public without their consent, it would become a GDPR scandal. That is because they essentially own the data and are responsible for managing it accordingly. However, Web3 is about you owning your funds and your data. This also means that you should have the option to decide whether you want your information publicly displayed in the same manner, or not. 
	 Another factor is the aspect of security. Since all information is publicly displayed on blockchains like Ethereum, hackers and exploiters can easily manipulate systems, target specific wallets, and track weak points for potential exploits. ZKP can enable privacy on the blockchain, which it already has with many cryptocurrency projects using this powerful technology. 
	 ZKP has been described by Vitalik Buterin as   "the most powerful cryptographic technology." [70] 
	 Traditional institutions like supply chain organizations, businesses, and banks that wish to engage with and utilize smart contracts, but need to keep their information secret, so to be competitive, must have privacy within blockchain networks. Furthermore, these organizations frequently must adhere to laws like the GDPR of the European Union, to protect the Personally Identifiable Information of their clients (HIPAA). [71] 
	 ZKP enables institutions to securely interact with blockchain networks without giving up control of sensitive and proprietary data sets. In contrast to permissioned blockchain networks, which have emerged as a means of preserving transaction privacy for institutions away from the public eye. In order to encourage innovation and build a more effective global economy, ZKP technology is successfully opening a variety of institutional use cases for public blockchain networks that were previously unreachable. 
	 In Web3, you may believe you are anonymous because your name or identity isn't directly tied to a noncustodial wallet. However, since about everyone interacts with KYC and identity points (centralized exchanges) and is sending transactions to and from these central vulnerabilities, your identity can be easily found. This essentially means that every activity you do on the blockchain can be tracked. ZKPs can enrich users with privacy in a world of increased surveillance and spying, becoming the missing piece in a perfect blockchain. 
	 ZKrollups and Optimistic Rollups 
	 ZKrollups and Optimistic Rollups are an L2 scaling solution utilizing ZKPs. It is enhancing Ethereum by creating a new network framework on top with enhanced functionalities. 
	 L2 scaling solutions provide different approaches to the same problem, which is Ethereum scaling. These Zero Knowledge rollup solutions are the most promising approach to this problem. 
	 What are rollups? 
	 Rollups execute transactions off-chain, typically on a rollup-specific chain, before batching, compressing, and sending transaction data to the main Ethereum chain. This enables for more transactions in the same Ethereum block. By having computation and state storage done off-chain, ZKrollups boost throughput on the Ethereum mainnet. It can handle thousands of transactions in a single batch while just sending the few necessary bits of information. It also uses the L1 Ethereum mainnet for security/consensus and separates its L2 as a layer for execution and data. 
	 Optimistic rollups are deemed “optimistic” as they assume off-chain transactions are valid by default for off-chain transactions, in contrast with ZKrollups that don't. 
	 Since 2021 ZKrollups became EVM compatible, something was said to be a challenge. EVM-enabled ZKrollups will undoubtedly make many L1s obsolete. This is because of the functionality it creates for users and the blockchain as a whole. 
	 A survey done by MinaProtocol saw an overwhelming 90% of survey participants feel that cryptocurrencies utilizing ZKPs are more attractive than those that do not. This could be a reflection of increasing privacy concerns. 
	 Ninety percent said they see cryptocurrencies that incorporate ZKPs are more attractive than those that don't. Seventy-eight percent said they see ZKPs as important to the future of the metaverse and Web3. More than 40% see finance as the industry most in need of ZKP solutions, followed by healthcare (12%), social media (5%), e-commerce (3%), gaming and entertainment (2%), and collectibles such as NFTs (2%). 
	 More than 48% of respondents expressed the greatest concern for government access to data, more so than third-party companies (44%), social media platforms (41%), banks (40%) and crypto-wallets (36%). About 76% of respondents said they'd at least heard about ZKPs and understood what they were and that 42% believed that ZKPs will be "of the highest importance in the metaverse and Web3." 
	 Evan Shapiro, CEO of the Mina Foundation, said: "What's most interesting to me about the findings is how the crypto community now strongly understands ZKPs, and that they can be used to protect their privacy." [72] 
	 Similarly, the 2022 Messari Crypto Thesis Report predict that:   "On a long-enough timeline, all crypto will converge to Zero Knowledge Crypto." [73] 
	 Without privacy-enhancing technology such as ZKPs, the future that blockchain enables is transparency and lack of privacy. With ZKPs, all the existing functionalities that an EVM compatible blockchain has exists, but with the important aspect of preserving user integrity through their right to privacy. Today, blockchains like Ethereum and Bitcoin are like a publicly displayed glass boxes with every interaction and activity that happens on them open for all to see. This begs the question of whether or not we want to live in such a world or build something that protects what we actually want and need. 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Chapter 11:  What’s in Store for the Future of Crypto? 
	 There can be no doubt that crypto is a rapidly evolving space of technological development. This continual technological evolution sets forth innovations that further enable innovative solutions. If we were to attempt to determine the exact future of crypto, we would fail. Many aspects of crypto today may not be there in the future. Everything from regulatory aspects, increased sanctions, regulations, and innovation can make the future look different. At the same time, increased hacks and exploits have increased the necessity for regulation, which undoubtedly will make the free world of crypto look quite different. For example, if digital identity was to be enforced on all interactions online. 
	 The space of 2021 was substantially different from 2020, and 2020 that of 2017. In 2021, DeFi officially took off with a whopping $100 billion in TVL (Total Value Locked). Decentralized exchanges also took off, with an increase of 1,000% from 2020 in monthly trading volume. "Yield Farming" was one of the popular features. [74] 
	 Perhaps the most popular thing that increased popularity in 2021 was NFTs, which almost every news outlet reported about. In 2020, meme coins took off, with Dogecoin reaching tremendous popularity, and 2017 was the year of ICOs. No one could predict these trends. This shows that the future of crypto, the trends, the headlines, and the events are impossible to predict beforehand. 
	 Essentially, we have seen the free market reign independently while governments have frequently lain on the sidelines, observant. They see this technology evolving. A technology that has evolved to the point wherein it can dismantle and make them irrelevant. However, governments will by no means leave, nor will they let their irrelevance happen. They can, and likely will use this technology, at least aspects of it, to create their digital currencies. Something which has been dubbed as "CBDC" (Central Bank Digital Currency). 
	 Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) 
	 For many, CBDC is a controversial topic; it is the exact opposite of what cryptocurrencies and blockchain represent. Instead of decentralization, direct democracy, and open networks where everyone can participate, CBDCs are centralized "surveillance" systems for the central authority to achieve complete control and power over their users. Arguably, the objective of a CBDC is to use these new technological frameworks, or create new ones, to enhance the financial system. 
	 It has raised questions amongst crypto enthusiasts because they fear that it will undermine their right to privacy and independence. 
	 CBDCs give central authorities the ability to completely route you out of the system (censoring transactions) as well as control how much money you are allowed to have in your account. That means you don't own your own money, you can’t even control how much you are allowed to have. The ability for a central bank to control the account of users was proposed by the Federal Reserve in “Money and Payments: The U.S. Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation." [75] 
	 What Does the Future Look Like? 
	 It may be a free financial market with a mixture of CBDCs and decentralized cryptocurrencies. Most likely, that is the future. Could all cryptocurrencies be deemed illegal? That seems hard to implement, but not impossible in a dystopian world. Will people be forced to use CBDCs instead of stablecoins? What will happen to privacy-preserving digital currencies? Will they be considered illicit and sanctioned like Tornado Cash? We do not know the regulations that are coming in the future. We do not know what could happen to the market as a whole, but it will surely be increasingly regulated. 
	 Blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies are used in financial applications, companies, and games. It is used by rich people in Los Angeles and by poor people in Venezuela. Artists use it to create, own, and sell their artwork online. Developers create new applications, and entrepreneurs innovate and solve problems. 
	 Cryptocurrency has gained increased acceptance by people, and that acceptance will grow even more. There will be increased adoption due to the younger generation increasingly adopting the technology. A technology that is not just a part of a new financial framework but also a part of organizing interactions online in a new way. 
	 Undoubtedly, more innovation will occur, further enhancing and upgrading blockchain systems to solve new problems and bring unique benefits to new market segments. However, many consequences are unforeseen, and one should be careful to adopt technologies without knowing the consequences. Something relevant to all aspects of the innovation cycle in cryptocurrencies and elsewhere. 
	 Some people propose that the future may see a clash. A clash between ideologies of freedom and independence against control and power. Decentralization vs. Centralization. There shouldn't be any doubt that centralization and centralized governance and organization systems can also be effective, functional, and beneficial for people. However, people seek to free themselves from a centralized system because of the risk of manipulation and evil intent. The chance that freedom can be taken from you at a given time. 
	 With surveillance systems that monitor people's financial transactions 24/7, people feel as if they are guilty until proven innocent, something that directly goes against the presumption of innocence in most legal courts. It also raises questions as to the legal and or ethical aspects of it all. 
	 The presumption of innocence is a legal principle that every person accused of any crime is considered innocent until proven guilty. Under the presumption of innocence, the legal burden of proof is thus on the prosecution, which must present compelling evidence to the trier of fact (a judge or a jury). [76] 
	 I would certainly raise some ethical concerns, considering what many technological areas are set to achieve. With increased technological advancements outside of cryptocurrency and blockchain like biotechnology, artificial intelligence, and nanotechnology, we do not even know what the entire future could look like in 5–10 years. These technologies are set to change society much more than crypto does, with drastically worse consequences if the technology falls into the wrong hands or even just becomes implemented. 
	 With biotechnology, even our thoughts and bodies can be monitored (biological monitoring) and subjected to surveillance. Whether or not it is stated to be done for a good reason, it raises many concerns and fears. Many people fear that such complete control through these technologies could create a dystopian society. 
	 Technological development occurs as a natural progression of human interactions, ideas, and passion. However, everyone, not just individuals or companies and organizations, should question the ethical aspects of what they are creating. They should ask what the potential negative consequences could be for their technology. At most, give attention to it. 
	 Could blockchain be used to gather a complete stronghold over citizens and the people? Could it become a part of an unhealthy system where some people get full control over others? Perhaps. 
	 The academic Phillip Rogaway summed it up well when he said: 
	 But, despite all these arguments, I am skeptical about rationalist accounts of ethical affronts, be it mass surveillance or anything else. If we behave morally, it is not because of rational analyses, but an instinctual preference for liberty, empathy, or companionship. As Schneier points out, animals don't like to be surveilled because it makes them feel like prey, while it makes the surveillor feel like—and act like—a predator. I think people know at an instinctual level that a life in which our thoughts, discourse, and interactions are subjected to constant algorithmic or human monitoring is no life at all. We are sprinting towards a world that we know, even without rational thought, is not a place where man belongs. [77] 
	 Concerns and Censorship 
	 In this chapter, I want to highlight some concerns about the technological development in crypto and elsewhere. Most of these things are like tools. They may be innocent in themselves, but when used with evil or bad intent, the tools become dangerous. At the same time, the mere consequences that the specific technology can enable should be weighted on a scale of good or bad. 
	 Blockchain, open-source and decentralized, and privacy-preserving technology can create an immediate better future as opposed to closed, centralized, and monopolizing technology where data about users can be used for nefarious purposes. Cryptocurrencies have the potential to make the internet fairer, more egalitarian, and more democratic. It has the potential to remove power structures and create new ones. If one uses the internet, one might just vote for a decentralized one that is censorship resistant and inclusive to everyone. 
	 The question should be raised as to if censorship-free internet or, for example, a censorship-free social media application is a good thing. A censorship-free application would entail an application without censorship, i.e., without limits, rules, and regulations. There could be unethical behavior and uncomfortable explicit content that would be available for all to see without the ability for it to be taken down. A place like that could be likened to the dark web and is not a place I would like to be. A decentralized internet that is run by a DAO making the decisions is better; that would enable regulations or censorship to be done in a manner whereby the community votes on them. Those who have access to vote on the decisions could be any token holder, thus including all participants of the internet, making it truly fairer, democratic, and a safe place to be that is regulated by the collective. If introducing a little censorship is making the internet or applications a better place, then where is the line between too much censorship and too little? 
	 It is not clear exactly how this can be done, or how we would ensure that the things we are building will actually have a positive outcome, but these things surely should be put to light (by addressing them) so the process can start from there. 
	 
 
 



 
 
   
   Chapter 12:  The Metaverse 
	 The term "metaverse" is a current industry buzzword, used everywhere from prominent social media companies like Facebook to small crypto startups. Like other hyped buzzwords, its definition is ambiguous, debatable, and determined by the goals of those who use it. 
	 The phrase "metaverse" was first used by author Neal Stephenson in his science fiction book  Snow Crash  in 1992, which imagines a virtual reality-based replacement for the internet. In the book, characters frequently explore the internet world using digital representations of themselves to escape their dystopian reality. 
	 Accordingly, the metaverse is a virtual reality environment that is portrayed in  Snow Crash  as a planet-encircling market where virtual properties may be purchased and sold and where VR goggle-wearing individuals play as 3D avatars of their choosing. 
	 Scarily depicting a future reality, CNBCs, like many others, point to the fact that this book predicted the coming importance of the metaverse. 
	 Today, virtual reality, digital ownership within it, and avatars to choose from are still central to modern concepts of the metaverse. 
	 Recently, the metaverse has been depicted as a virtual environment where people can work, play, shop, interact, and do activities together that people enjoy doing in real life (or, more to the point, on the internet). They can choose to present themselves as any avatar they want and enter into a new digital reality. This has been argued by people who see the metaverse as a marketing jargon to attract attention. 
	 How New Is the Metaverse? 
	 Virtual worlds resembling the metaverse concept have been around for as long as the gaming industry has been. For example, games like Habbo, (which had tremendous popularity in around 2011) is argued to be the start of the metaverse concept. Habbo can be compared to the metaverse because of the digitalized gamified social interactions that even today take place there. However, the differentiating factor was that you could not immerse yourself in the world with VR glasses. 
	 Habbo Hotel, established in 2000, is an online community distinguished by pixelated avatars and objects that live within digital landscapes. The software enables users to interact in digital "hotels" with public spaces open to anyone and private spaces that can be adorned with individually made digital goods. 
	 Azerion, a digital entertainment company, purchased Habbo developer Sulake in January 2021, and the site has around 320 million total accounts and 850,000 monthly active users. Now, Habbo is developing into adopting the concept of Web3 and NFTs to tokenize their economy. This will make items within the game actually worth real money. 
	 I can remember how addicting it was to play Habbo because of the realization that the rare merchandise that you can acquire in the game can potentially be sold to someone that's interested in that item. Today, they are making that process a part of the game, which is interesting but also worrying. People would immerse themselves entirely within the game; it could be their source of income and livelihood. Essentially trading their real lives for some digital virtual representation. 
	 This is how the metaverse can be an escape from reality. Even though many things today function as an escape mechanism, the metaverse is another level because people will literally live their lives in illusions. 
	 Future Trends 
	 The coronavirus pandemic, or more accurately the lockdowns, drastically changed lifestyles worldwide and is a contributor to the metaverse movement. Suddenly, it made sense for tech companies to try to capitalize on the situation by adding additional forms of entertainment and use-case, given that people spent so much time in Zoom meetings for work. According to Business of Apps, [78]  Zoom saw 300 million meeting participants per day in June 2020. 
	 Video game usage is, even today, on the rise as people seek to enter a more exciting environment without leaving the security and comfort of their homes. The current forecast is 3.32 billion active gamers by 2024. [79]  Considering the world's population is projected to be around 8.1 billion people by 2024, that's 41% of the world actively playing games. A large percentage of these gamers will likely also be interested in the metaverse and all things related to it—like crypto. 
	 In general, the metaverse is presented as a digital reality where you can meet people, talk and interact, "hangout," and even do office meetings in. In a very weird and unnecessary way, it is pushed not as a game, but as a part of the near future where you will live instead of interacting with the real world. You could get your senses fulfilled by any digital visualization in high quality. You could play a game or watch a movie as if you were there. Combine VR goggles with sensory suits, and now you can feel everything that is going on, something that can make you feel pain or pleasure. 
	 Consequences of the Metaverse 
	 All of this raises questions about the potential consequences of a world where people flee from their real-life problems to whatever pleasure they can find within the metaverse. It raises the question as to how the generation that grows up in the metaverse will be able to function in the real world. It raises questions about how much such sensory inputs can damage dopamine receptors in people interacting in the metaverse daily and much, much more. 
	 The thing about the metaverse is that it is marketed and envisioned to be more than just games. It is supposed to become the place where you actually can spend most of your life, replacing all social activities in the real world. In the Metaverse, if it ever will be an integral part of the future, you will definitely interact with cryptocurrencies because the entire digital universes would be tied to a blockchain network. Anything digital that you purchase, be it a digital land (NFT) or digital merchandise you will use cryptocurrencies. 
	 The metaverse is still a very far-fetched concept with few successful implementations as a new digital reality to replace ours. Maybe we should be happy with the reality we are in and focus on improving it rather than building illusions online. But technology will always advance, and we need to understand it in order to abolish it or implement it. 
 
 



 
 
   
   Conclusion 
	 There is a high chance that you may need to interact with and use cryptocurrencies, blockchain, and CBDC technology in the future, whether it be to purchase goods online or to use in the metaverse, or for registering legal documents and artwork. Being able to use and understand these new technologies now will put you in a great position, a step ahead of everyone else. 
	 Reading this book should give you the necessary background into the crypto space. With this book, you can navigate the space and understand some of its core components in a much better way. 
	 This book was created to give you the necessary insight into how crypto came about, what it is about itself, several key components, and the different aspects of it. Keep in mind that this space is an ever evolving one. I don’t know if absolutely everything written in this book will be completely up to date in 2, 3, or 5 years. However, I do believe that this book will forever be able to educate people about the sentiments behind crypto and the narratives behind this technological evolution. 
	 I do believe that anyone having read this book will have reached a better understanding of the future that is ahead of us, and as well, what has been going on in the past. Cryptocurrency, blockchain, DeFi, and the new internet of Web3 has taken the world by storm and we can only wait to see what will be the next new thing. 
	 Answering the question "What exactly is crypto?" is not a straightforward question as it may seem. Crypto is more than solely cryptocurrencies. For many, it is a lifestyle. It is a hobby, a source of income, and even their life purpose. What crypto stands for is an ideology of freedom in the digital age. Crypto and blockchain give people the meaning and independence they want in their lives while feeling that they are a part of something greater, and in many ways, it is something greater. Something beyond their usual "9 to 5" lives.  
	   
 
 



 
 
   
   Tools and Resources 
	 Using the links below (available on eBook format) will give you certain benefits.  
	 Informational overview of the market 
	 
	 Coingecko 
 
	 
	 Coinmarketcap 
 
	 Start your investment with these recommended exchanges I use:  
	 
	 Binance 
 
	 (Link format:  https://www.binance.com/en/activity/referral-entry/CPA?fromActivityPage=true&ref=CPA_00CS08Y48A ) 
	 100 USDT Cashback 
	 
	 Coinbase 
 
	 (Link format:  https://coinbase.com/join/blum_7z?src=ios-link ) 
	 Free 10$ Bitcoin 
	 
	 Kucoin 
 
	 Scan QR code, 500$ beginner gift package - 10% off fees.  
	 
	 Recommended Trading interface 
	 
	 Tradingview 
 
	 Self-custodial wallets 
	 
	 Metamask 
 
	 
	 Phantom  (Solana network) 
 
	   
 
 



 
 
   
   Sources 
	 
	 
	 [1]  Jake Frankenfield. (2022, March 24). Smart Contracts.  Investopedia.  https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/smart-contracts.asp 
	 [2]  French Revolution 1787–1799.  Britannica.  https://www.britannica.com/event/French-Revolution 
	 [3]  Haitian Revolution.  Britannica.  https://www.britannica.com/topic/Haitian-Revolution 
	 [4]  Peter McPhee. (2019, November 20). We Live in a World of Upheaval. So Why Aren’t Today’s Protests Leading to Revolutions?  The Conversation.  https://theconversation.com/we-live-in-a-world-of-upheaval-so-why-arent-todays-protests-leading-to-revolutions-126505 
	 [5]  Anarcho-capitalism.  Wikipedia.  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anarcho-capitalism 
	 [6]  Cryptography.  Wikipedia . https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptography 
	 [7]  A Brief History of the Internet.  University System of Georgia . https://www.usg.edu/galileo/skills/unit07/internet07_02.phtml 
	 [8]  Jake Frankenfield. (2022, Jan 7). Double-Spending.  Investopedia.  https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/doublespending.asp 
	 [9]  Admin. (2022, March 7). DigiCash and e-gold, the Cryptocurrencies that Failed Before Bitcoin was Born.  BitYard News.  https://news.bityard.com/digicash-and-e-gold-the-cryptocurrencies-that-failed-before-bitcoin-was-born/ 
	 [10]   Satoshi Nakamoto . Wikipedia.   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Satoshi_Nakamoto 
	 [11]  Vitalik Buterin. (2014). Ethereum Whitepaper. Ethereum.org. https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/ 
	 [12]  Satoshi Nakamoto. (2008). Bitcoin Whitepaper. https://bitcoinwhitepaper.co/ 
	 [13]   Pete Rizzo. (2021, April 26). 10 Years Ago Today, Bitcoin Creator Satoshi Nakamoto Sent His Final Message.  Forbes.  https://www.forbes.com/sites/peterizzo/2021/04/26/10-years-ago-today-bitcoin-creator-satoshi-nakamoto-sent-his-final-message 
	 [14]  Financial Crisis of 2007–2008.  Wikipedia.  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Financial_crisis_of_2007 
	 [15]  Inflation.  Wikipedia.  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation 
	 [16]  Nathan Reiff. (2021, December 24). Blockchain: One of History’s Greatest Inventions.  Investopedia.  https://www.investopedia.com/tech/blockchain-one-historys-greatest-inventions/ 
	 [17]  Block Size Limit Controversy.  Wikipedia.  https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Block_size_limit_controversy 
	 [18]  Patrick. (2017, October 23). Block Size Explained.  Mycryptopedia . https://www.mycryptopedia.com/block-size-explained/ 
	 [19]  jgarzik. (2010, October 3). [PATCH] Increase Block Size Limit.  Satoshi Nakamoto Institute.  https://satoshi.nakamotoinstitute.org/posts/bitcointalk/threads/233/ 
	 [20]  What is Block Size?  Bitstamp.  https://blog.bitstamp.net/post/what-is-block-size/ 
	 [21]  Kai Sedgwick. (2018, April 20). No, Visa Doesn’t Handle 24,000 TPS and Neither Does Your Pet Blockchain.  Bitcoin.com.  https://news.bitcoin.com/no-visa-doesnt-handle-24000-tps-and-neither-does-your-pet-blockchain/ 
	 [22]  Beyond Bitcoin Lightning Network: Altcoins with Lightning Network support.  Cointelegraph.  https://cointelegraph.com/altcoins-for-beginners/beyond-bitcoin-lightning-network-altcoins-with-lightning-network-support 
	 [23]  Emma Newberry. (2021, September 15). 8 Digital Payment Cryptos That Are Faster Than Bitcoin.  Motley Fool.  https://www.fool.com/the-ascent/cryptocurrency/articles/8-digital-payment-cryptos-that-are-faster-than-bitcoin/ 
	 [24]  Beyond Bitcoin Lightning Network: Altcoins with Lightning Network support.  Cointelegraph . https://cointelegraph.com/altcoins-for-beginners/beyond-bitcoin-lightning-network-altcoins-with-lightning-network-support 
	 [25]  What Is an Altcoin?  Bitflyer.  https://bitflyer.com/en-eu/faq/55-7 
	 [26]  Jake Frankenfield. (2022, March25). Litecoin (LTC).  Investopedia.  https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/litecoin.asp 
	 [27]  Vitalik Buterin.  Wikipedia . https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitalik_Buterin 
	 [28]  Nathan Reiff. (2021, December 24). Blockchain: One of History’s Greatest Inventions?  Investopedia.  https://www.investopedia.com/tech/blockchain-one-historys-greatest-inventions/ 
	 [29]  What Is a Virtual Machine?  VMWare.  https://www.vmware.com/topics/glossary/content/virtual-machine.html 
	 [30]  Ethereum Whitepaper.  Ethereum.org.  https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/ 
	 [31]  Scaling.  Ethereum.org.  https://ethereum.org/nb/developers/docs/scaling/ 
	 [32]  Aoyon Ashraf. (2022, September 15). Vitalik Buterin Says Ethereum Merge Cut Global Energy Usage by 0.2%, One of Biggest Decarbonization Events Ever.  CoinDesk.  https://www.coindesk.com/business/2022/09/15/vitalik-buterin-says-ethereum-merge-cut-global-energy-usage-by-02-one-of-biggest-decarbonization-events-ever/ 
	 [33]  Sharding.  Ethereum.org.  https://ethereum.org/en/upgrades/sharding/ 
	 [34]  Welcome to Ethereum.  Ethereum.org.  https://ethereum.org/en 
	 [35]  Reuters. (2022, August 8). Tornado Cash hit with sanctions, accused of helping North Korea hackers.  New York Post . https://nypost.com/2022/08/08/tornado-cash-accused-of-helping-hackers-hit-with-sanctions/ 
	 [36]  Tin|CC Critic. (2022, August). "Currently it looks like over 66% of the beacon chain validators will adhere to OFAC regulations."  Reddit.  https://www.reddit.com/r/CryptoCurrency/comments/wpbj9t/currently_it_looks_like_over_66_of_the_beacon/ 
	 [37]  Hasib Anwar. (2018, June 6). Blockchain Vs Swift: The New Banking.  101 Blockchains.  https://101blockchains.com/blockchain-vs-swift/ 
	 [38]  FinTech Innovation Trends over The Past 55 Years: How Valuable is Your Innovation?  Cissoko and Company.  https://cissokomamady.com/2022/02/23/fintech-innovation-trends-over-the-past-55-years-how-valuable-is-your-innovation/ 
	 [39]  Custodian.  Merriam-Webster Online . https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/custodian 
	 [40]  Chirag. (2022, April 7). Custodial vs. Non-Custodial Wallets: Understanding the Difference Points.  Appinventiv.  https://appinventiv.com/blog/custodial-vs-non-custodial-wallets/ 
	 [41]  Cryptopedia Staff. (2021, May 6). Custodial vs. Non-Custodial Wallets.  Cryptopedia.  https://www.gemini.com/cryptopedia/crypto-wallets-custodial-vs-noncustodial#section-custodial-crypto-wallets-pro-and-cons 
	 [42]  Arbitrage.  Wikipedia.  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arbitrage 
	 [43]  Uniswap: Overview & History.  Messari.  https://messari.io/asset/uniswap/profile 
	 [44]  Whitepaper.  Loopring.org.  https://loopring.org/resources/en_whitepaper.pdf 
	 [45]  Jacob Kozhipatt. (2022, April 5). DeFi has a $10 billion fraud problem. We asked 3 crypto security experts to share the 3 tips any new investor needs to know to avoid losing their hard-earned money.  Business Insider.  https://www.businessinsider.com/how-to-invest-crypto-ethereum-altcoins-defi-avoid-scams-rugpull-2022-4?r=US&IR=T 
	 [46]  Tor Constantino. (2021, November 25). Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Fraud in 2021 Is Up 600% Over 2020, Topping $10.5 Billion, Research Finds.  Motley Fool.  https://www.fool.com/the-ascent/cryptocurrency/articles/decentralized-finance-defi-fraud-in-2021-is-up-600-over-2020-topping-105-billion-research-finds/ 
	 [47]  Tor Constantino. (2021, November 25). Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Fraud in 2021 Is Up 600% Over 2020, Topping $10.5 Billion, Research Finds.  Motley Fool.  https://www.fool.com/the-ascent/cryptocurrency/articles/decentralized-finance-defi-fraud-in-2021-is-up-600-over-2020-topping-105-billion-research-finds/ 
	 [48]  Decentralized Autonomous Organization.  Contracts Counsel.  https://www.contractscounsel.com/b/decentralized-autonomous-organization 
	 [49]  Sybil Attack.  Wikipedia.  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sybil_attack 
	 [50]  William Foxley. (2022, October 29). Flash Loans Have Made Their Way to Manipulating Protocol Elections.  CoinDesk.  https://www.coindesk.com/tech/2020/10/29/flash-loans-have-made-their-way-to-manipulating-protocol-elections/ 
	 [51]  Marcel Deer. (2022, January 22). What are Flash Loans in DeFi?  Cointelegraph . https://cointelegraph.com/explained/what-are-flash-loans-in-defi 
	 [52]  DAOs and the Complexities of Web3 Governance.  Chainlink.  https://blog.chain.link/daos/ 
	 [53]  Youssef Faqir-Rhazoui et al.  (2021, October). A Comparative Analysis of the Platforms for Decentralized Autonomous Organizations in the Ethereum Blockchain.  Journal of Internet Services and Applications.  doi:10.1186/s13174-021-00139-6 
	 [54]  Tim Copeland. (2019, Jan 18). Happy Birthday Dash.  Decrypt.  https://decrypt.co/4582/dash-history-masternodes-venezuela 
	 [55]  @MessariCrypto. (2021, May 17). Initial Token Allocations for Public Blockchains.  Twitter.  https://twitter.com/MessariCrypto/status/1394298624906047491/photo/1 
	 [56]  Xiaotong Sun et al.  (2022). Decentralization Illusion in DeFi: Evidence from MakerDAO. (Paper). University of Glasgow. https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2203/2203.16612.pdf 
	 [57]  Will Kenton. (2022, June 11). Economies of Scale: What Are They and How Are They Used?  Investopedia.  https://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/economiesofscale.asp 
	 [58]  Defusing Crypto’s Ticking Time Bomb.  Coin.fyi.  https://coin.fyi/news/ethereum/defusing-crypto-s-ticking-time-bomb-wosvs8 
	 [59]  Danny Nelson. (2022, March 4). Crypto Industry’s Sanctions Woes on Full Display in MetaMask’s Venezuela Hiccup.  CoinDesk.  https://www.coindesk.com/business/2022/03/04/crypto-industrys-sanctions-woes-on-full-display-in-metamasks-venezuela-hiccup/ 
	 [60]  Pool Distribution.  BTC.com.  https://btc.com/stats/pool 
	 [61]  Top 25 Miners by Blocks.  Etherscan.  https://etherscan.io/stat/miner?range=7&blocktype=blocks 
	 [62]  Danning Sui et al. (2018, May 9). Are Miners Decentralized? A Look into Mining Pools.  ConsenSys.  https://media.consensys.net/are-miners-centralized-a-look-into-mining-pools-b594425411dc 
	 [63]  Danning Sui et al. (2018, May 9). Are Miners Decentralized? A Look into Mining Pools.  ConsenSys.  https://media.consensys.net/are-miners-centralized-a-look-into-mining-pools-b594425411dc 
	 [64]  Mempool.  River Financial.  https://river.com/learn/terms/m/mempool/ 
	 [65]  Dominance Hierachy.  Wikipedia.   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dominance_hierarchy 
	 [66]  Gavin Wood. (2018, September 12). Why We Need Web3.  Medium.  https://gavofyork.medium.com/why-we-need-web-3-0-5da4f2bf95ab 
	 [67]  @jack. (2021, December 21). You don’t own “web3.”  Twitter.  https://twitter.com/jack/status/1473139010197508098?lang=en 
	 [68]  81 of Top 100 Companies Use Blockchain Technology, Blockdata Research Shows.  Forkast.  https://forkast.news/81-of-top-100-companies-use-blockchain-technology-blockdata/ 
	 [69]  Cem Dilmegani. (2022, September 1). Zero-Knowledge Proof: How it Works, Use Cases & Applications.  AI Multiple.  https://research.aimultiple.com/zero-knowledge-proofs/ 
	 [70]  An Approximate Introduction to How zk-SNARKs are Possible.  Vitalik.ca . https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/01/26/snarks.html 
	 [71]  What Is a Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP)?  Chainlink.  https://blog.chain.link/what-is-a-zero-knowledge-proof-zkp/ 
	 [72]  Marc Wojno. (2022, June 14). Zero-Knowledge Proofs Will Play a Major Role in the Future of Web3, DeFi and Metaverse: Survey.  ZDNET.  https://www.zdnet.com/finance/blockchain/zero-knowledge-proofs-will-play-a-major-role-in-the-future-of-web3-defi-and-metaverse-survey/ 
	 [73]  Crypto Theses for 2022.  Messari.  https://messari.io/pdf/messari-report-crypto-theses-for-2022.pdf 
	 [74]  Josh Howarth. (2022, September 7). Top Cryptocurrency Trends for 2022-2025.  Exploding Topics.  https://explodingtopics.com/blog/cryptocurrency-trends 
	 [75]  Andjela Radmilac. (2022, January 23). The Fed’s proposed CBDC: a dystopian nightmare or a necessary evolution of the dollar?  Cryptoslate . https://cryptoslate.com/the-feds-proposed-cbdc-a-dystopian-nightmare-or-a-necessary-evolution-of-the-dollar/ 
	 [76]  Presumption of Innocence.  Wikipedia.  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Presumption_of_innocence 
	 [77]  Phillip Rogaway. (2015, December). The Moral Character of Cryptographic Work. (Paper). Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis. https://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~rogaway/papers/moral-fn.pdf 
	 [78]  Iqbal, M. (2022, June 30). Zoom Revenue and Usage Stats (2022).  Business of Apps.  https://www.businessofapps.com/data/zoom-statistics/ 
	 [79]  Number of active video gamers worldwide from 2015 to 2021, with forecasts from 2022 to 2024.  Statista . https://www.statista.com/statistics/748044/number-video-gamers-world/ 
	 
 
 
 
