
 
 
   
   
     
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 Hands-On Graph Neural Networks Using Python 
 Practical techniques and architectures for building powerful graph and deep learning apps with PyTorch 
 Maxime Labonne 
 
 BIRMINGHAM—MUMBAI 
 Hands-On Graph Neural Networks Using Python 
 Copyright © 2023 Packt Publishing 
 All rights reserved . No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews. 
 Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing or its dealers and distributors, will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly or indirectly by this book. 
 Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information. 
 Group Product Manager : Gebin George 
 Publishing Product Manager : Dinesh Chaudhary 
 Senior Editor : David Sugarman 
 Technical Editor : Devanshi Ayare 
 Copy Editor : Safis Editing 
 Project Coordinator : Farheen Fathima 
 Proofreader : Safis Editing 
 Indexer : Tejal Daruwale Soni 
 Production Designer : Joshua Misquitta 
 First published: April 2023 
 Production reference: 1240323 
 Published by Packt Publishing Ltd. 
 Livery Place 
 35 Livery Street 
 Birmingham 
 B3 2PB, UK. 
 ISBN 978-1-80461-752-6 
 www.packtpub.com 
 Contributors 
 About the author 
 Maxime Labonne  is a senior applied researcher at J.P. Morgan with a Ph.D. in machine learning and cyber security from the Polytechnic Institute of Paris. During his Ph.D., Maxime worked on developing machine learning algorithms for anomaly detection in computer networks. He then joined the AI Connectivity Lab at Airbus, where he applied his expertise in machine learning to improve the security and performance of computer networks. He then joined J.P. Morgan, where he now develops techniques for solving a variety of challenging problems in finance and other domains. In addition to his research work, Maxime is passionate about sharing his knowledge and experience with others through Twitter ( @maximelabonne ) and his personal blog. 
 About the reviewers 
 Dr. Mürsel Taşgın  is a computer scientist with a Ph.D. He graduated from the Computer Engineering Department of Middle East Technical University in 2002. He completed his master of science and Ph.D. in the Computer Engineering Department of Bogazici University. During his Ph.D., he worked in the field of complex systems, graphs, and ML. He also worked in industry in technical, research, and managerial roles (at Mostly.AI, KKB, Turkcell, and Akbank). Dr. Mürsel Taşgın’s current focus is mainly on generative AI, graph machine learning, and financial applications of machine learning. He also teaches  artificial intelligence  ( AI )/ML courses at universities. 
 I would like to thank my dear wife Zehra and precious son Kerem for their support and understanding during my long working hours. 
 Amir Shirian  is a data scientist at Nokia, where he applies his expertise in multimodal signal processing and ML to solve complex problems. He received his Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Warwick, England, after completing his bachelor of science and master of science degrees in electrical engineering at the University of Tehran, Iran. Amir’s research focuses on developing algorithms and models for emotion and behavior understanding, with a particular interest in using graph neural networks to analyze and interpret data from multiple sources. His work has been published in several high-profile academic journals and presented at international conferences. Amir enjoys hiking, playing 3tar, and exploring new technologies in his free time. 
 Lorenzo Giusti  is a Ph.D. student in data science at La Sapienza, University of Rome, with a focus on extending graph neural networks through topological deep learning. He has extensive research experience as a visiting Ph.D. student at Cambridge, as a research scientist intern at NASA, where he supervised a team and led a project on synthesizing the Martian environment using images from spacecraft cameras, and as a research scientist intern at CERN, working on anomaly detection for particle physics accelerators. Lorenzo also has a master of science in data science from La Sapienza and a bachelor of engineering in computer engineering from Roma Tre University, where he focused on quantum technologies. 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 Table of Contents 
 Preface 
 Part 1: Introduction to Graph Learning 
 1 
 Getting Started with Graph Learning 
 Why graphs? 
 Why graph learning? 
 Why graph neural networks? 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 2 
 Graph Theory for Graph Neural Networks 
 Technical requirements 
 Introducing graph properties 
 Directed graphs 
 Weighted graphs 
 Connected graphs 
 Types of graphs 
 Discovering graph concepts 
 Fundamental objects 
 Graph measures 
 Adjacency matrix representation 
 Exploring graph algorithms 
 Breadth-first search 
 Depth-first search 
 Summary 
 3 
 Creating Node Representations with DeepWalk 
 Technical requirements 
 Introducing Word2Vec 
 CBOW versus skip-gram 
 Creating skip-grams 
 The skip-gram model 
 DeepWalk and random walks 
 Implementing DeepWalk 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 Part 2: Fundamentals 
 4 
 Improving Embeddings with Biased Random Walks in Node2Vec 
 Technical requirements 
 Introducing Node2Vec 
 Defining a neighborhood 
 Introducing biases in random walks 
 Implementing Node2Vec 
 Building a movie RecSys 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 5 
 Including Node Features with Vanilla Neural Networks 
 Technical requirements 
 Introducing graph datasets 
 The Cora dataset 
 The Facebook Page-Page dataset 
 Classifying nodes with vanilla neural networks 
 Classifying nodes with vanilla graph neural networks 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 6 
 Introducing Graph Convolutional Networks 
 Technical requirements 
 Designing the graph convolutional layer 
 Comparing graph convolutional and graph linear layers 
 Predicting web traffic with node regression 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 7 
 Graph Attention Networks 
 Technical requirements 
 Introducing the graph attention layer 
 Linear transformation 
 Activation function 
 Softmax normalization 
 Multi-head attention 
 Improved graph attention layer 
 Implementing the graph attention layer in NumPy 
 Implementing a GAT in PyTorch Geometric 
 Summary 
 Part 3: Advanced Techniques 
 8 
 Scaling Up Graph Neural Networks with GraphSAGE 
 Technical requirements 
 Introducing GraphSAGE 
 Neighbor sampling 
 Aggregation 
 Classifying nodes on PubMed 
 Inductive learning on protein-protein interactions 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 9 
 Defining Expressiveness for Graph Classification 
 Technical requirements 
 Defining expressiveness 
 Introducing the GIN 
 Classifying graphs using GIN 
 Graph classification 
 Implementing the GIN 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 10 
 Predicting Links with Graph Neural Networks 
 Technical requirements 
 Predicting links with traditional methods 
 Heuristic techniques 
 Matrix factorization 
 Predicting links with node embeddings 
 Introducing Graph Autoencoders 
 Introducing VGAEs 
 Implementing a VGAE 
 Predicting links with SEAL 
 Introducing the SEAL framework 
 Implementing the SEAL framework 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 11 
 Generating Graphs Using Graph Neural Networks 
 Technical requirements 
 Generating graphs with traditional techniques 
 The Erdős–Rényi model 
 The small-world model 
 Generating graphs with graph neural networks 
 Graph variational autoencoders 
 Autoregressive models 
 Generative adversarial networks 
 Generating molecules with MolGAN 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 12 
 Learning from Heterogeneous Graphs 
 Technical requirements 
 The message passing neural network framework 
 Introducing heterogeneous graphs 
 Transforming homogeneous GNNs to heterogeneous GNNs 
 Implementing a hierarchical self-attention network 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 13 
 Temporal Graph Neural Networks 
 Technical requirements 
 Introducing dynamic graphs 
 Forecasting web traffic 
 Introducing EvolveGCN 
 Implementing EvolveGCN 
 Predicting cases of COVID-19 
 Introducing MPNN-LSTM 
 Implementing MPNN-LSTM 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 14 
 Explaining Graph Neural Networks 
 Technical requirements 
 Introducing explanation techniques 
 Explaining GNNs with GNNExplainer 
 Introducing GNNExplainer 
 Implementing GNNExplainer 
 Explaining GNNs with Captum 
 Introducing Captum and integrated gradients 
 Implementing integrated gradients 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 Part 4: Applications 
 15 
 Forecasting Traffic Using A3T-GCN 
 Technical requirements 
 Exploring the PeMS-M dataset 
 Processing the dataset 
 Implementing the A3T-GCN architecture 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 16 
 Detecting Anomalies Using Heterogeneous GNNs 
 Technical requirements 
 Exploring the CIDDS-001 dataset 
 Preprocessing the CIDDS-001 dataset 
 Implementing a heterogeneous GNN 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 17 
 Building a Recommender System Using LightGCN 
 Technical requirements 
 Exploring the Book-Crossing dataset 
 Preprocessing the Book-Crossing dataset 
 Implementing the LightGCN architecture 
 Summary 
 Further reading 
 18 
 Unlocking the Potential of Graph Neural Networks for Real-World Applications 
 Index 
 Other Books You May Enjoy 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 Preface 
 In just ten years,  Graph Neural Networks  ( GNNs ) have become an essential and popular deep learning architecture. They have already had a significant impact various industries, such as in drug discovery, where GNNs predicted a new antibiotic, named halicin, and have improved estimated time of arrival calculations on Google Maps. Tech companies and universities are exploring the potential of GNNs in various applications, including recommender systems, fake news detection, and chip design. GNNs have enormous potential and many yet-to-be-discovered applications, making them a critical tool for solving  global problems. 
 In this book, we aim to provide a comprehensive and practical overview of the world of GNNs. We will begin by exploring the fundamental concepts of graph theory and graph learning and then delve into the most widely used and well-established GNN architectures. As we progress, we will also cover the latest advances in GNNs and introduce specialized architectures that are designed to tackle specific tasks, such as graph generation, link prediction,  and more. 
 In addition to these specialized chapters, we will provide hands-on experience through three practical projects. These projects will cover critical real-world applications of GNNs, including traffic forecasting, anomaly detection, and recommender systems. Through these projects, you will gain a deeper understanding of how GNNs work and also develop the skills to implement them in  practical scenarios. 
 Finally, this book provides a hands-on learning experience with readable code for every chapter’s techniques and relevant applications, which are readily accessible on GitHub and  Google Colab. 
 By the end of this book, you will have a comprehensive understanding of the field of graph learning and GNNs and will be well-equipped to design and implement these models for a wide range  of applications. 
 Who this book is for 
 This book is intended for individuals interested in learning about GNNs and how they can be applied to various real-world problems. This book is ideal for  data scientists ,  machine learning engineers , and  artificial intelligence  ( AI ) professionals who want to gain practical experience in designing and implementing GNNs. This book is written for individuals with prior knowledge of deep learning and machine learning. However, it provides a comprehensive introduction to the fundamental concepts of graph theory and graph learning for those new to the field. It will also be useful for researchers and students in computer science, mathematics, and engineering who want to expand their knowledge in this rapidly growing area  of research. 
 What this book covers 
 Chapter 1 ,  Getting Started with Graph Learning , provides a comprehensive introduction to GNNs, including their importance in modern data analysis and machine learning. The chapter starts by exploring the relevance of graphs as a representation of data and their widespread use in various domains. It then delves into the importance of graph learning, including different applications and techniques. Finally, the chapter focuses on the GNN architecture and highlights its unique features and performance compared to  other methods. 
 Chapter 2 ,  Graph Theory for Graph Neural Networks , covers the basics of graph theory and introduces various types of graphs, including their properties and applications. This chapter also covers fundamental graph concepts, such as the adjacency matrix, graph measures, such as centrality, and graph algorithms,  Breadth-First Search  ( BFS ) and  Depth-First  Search  ( DFS ). 
 Chapter 3 ,  Creating Node Representations with DeepWalk , focuses on DeepWalk, a pioneer in applying machine learning to graph data. The main objective of the DeepWalk architecture is to generate node representations that other models can utilize for downstream tasks such as node classification. The chapter covers two key components of DeepWalk – Word2Vec and random walks – with a particular emphasis on the Word2Vec  skip-gram model. 
 Chapter 4 ,  Improving Embeddings with Biased Random Walks in Node2Vec , focuses on the Node2Vec architecture, which is based on the DeepWalk architecture covered in the previous chapter. The chapter covers the modifications made to the random walk generation in Node2Vec and how to select the best parameters for a specific graph. The implementation of Node2Vec is compared to DeepWalk on Zachary’s Karate Club to highlight the differences between the two architectures. The chapter concludes with a practical application of Node2Vec, building a movie  recommendation system. 
 Chapter 5 ,  Including Node Features with Vanilla Neural Networks , explores the integration of additional information, such as node and edge features, into the graph embeddings to produce more accurate results. The chapter starts with a comparison of vanilla neural networks’ performance on node features only, treated as tabular datasets. Then, we will experiment with adding topological information to the neural networks, leading to the creation of a simple vanilla  GNN architecture. 
 Chapter 6 ,  Introducing Graph Convolutional Networks , focuses on the  Graph Convolutional Network  ( GCN ) architecture and its importance as a blueprint for GNNs. It covers the limitations of previous vanilla GNN layers and explains the motivation behind GCNs. The chapter details how the GCN layer works, its performance improvements over the vanilla GNN layer, and its implementation on the Cora and Facebook Page-Page datasets using PyTorch Geometric. The chapter also touches upon the task of node regression and the benefits of transforming tabular data into  a graph. 
 Chapter 7 ,  Graph Attention Networks , focuses on  Graph Attention Networks  ( GATs ), which are an improvement over GCNs. The chapter explains how GATs work by using the concept of self-attention and provides a step-by-step understanding of the graph attention layer. The chapter also implements a graph attention layer from scratch using NumPy. The final section of the chapter discusses the use of a GAT on two node classification datasets, Cora and CiteSeer, and compares the accuracy with that of  a GCN. 
 Chapter 8 ,  Scaling up Graph Neural Networks with GraphSAGE , focuses on the GraphSAGE architecture and its ability to handle large graphs effectively. The chapter covers the two main ideas behind GraphSAGE, including its neighbor sampling technique and aggregation operators. You will learn about the variants proposed by tech companies such as Uber Eats and Pinterest, as well as the benefits of GraphSAGE’s inductive approach. The chapter concludes by implementing GraphSAGE for node classification and multi-label  classification tasks. 
 Chapter 9 ,  Defining Expressiveness for Graph Classification , explores the concept of expressiveness in GNNs and how it can be used to design better models. It introduces the  Weisfeiler-Leman  ( WL ) test, which provides the framework for understanding expressiveness in GNNs. The chapter uses the WL test to compare different GNN layers and determine the most expressive one. Based on this result, a more powerful GNN is designed and implemented using PyTorch Geometric. The chapter concludes with a comparison of different methods for graph classification on the  PROTEINS dataset. 
 Chapter 10 ,  Predicting Links with Graph Neural Networks , focuses on link prediction in graphs. It covers traditional techniques, such as matrix factorization and GNN-based methods. The chapter explains the concept of link prediction and its importance in social networks and recommender systems. You will learn about the limitations of traditional techniques and the benefits of using GNN-based methods. We will explore three GNN-based techniques from two different families, including node embeddings and subgraph representation. Finally, you will implement various link prediction techniques in PyTorch Geometric and choose the best method for a  given problem. 
 Chapter 11 ,  Generating Graphs Using Graph Neural Networks , explores the field of graph generation, which involves finding methods to create new graphs. The chapter first introduces you to traditional techniques such as Erdős–Rényi and small-world models. Then you will focus on three families of solutions for GNN-based graph generation: VAE-based, autoregressive, and GAN-based models. The chapter concludes with an implementation of a GAN-based framework with  Reinforcement Learning  ( RL ) to generate new chemical compounds using the DeepChem library  with TensorFlow. 
 Chapter 12 ,  Learning from Heterogeneous Graphs , focuses on heterogeneous GNNs. Heterogeneous graphs contain different types of nodes and edges, in contrast to homogeneous graphs, which only involve one type of node and one type of edge. The chapter begins by reviewing the  Message Passing Neural Network  ( MPNN ) framework for homogeneous GNNs, then expands the framework to heterogeneous networks. Finally, we introduce a technique for creating a heterogeneous dataset, transforming homogeneous architectures into heterogeneous ones, and discussing an architecture specifically designed for processing  heterogeneous networks. 
 Chapter 13 ,  Temporal Graph Neural Networks , focuses on Temporal GNNs, or Spatio-Temporal GNNs, which are a type of GNN that can handle graphs with changing edges and features over time. The chapter first explains the concept of dynamic graphs and the applications of temporal GNNs, focusing on time series forecasting. The chapter then moves on to the application of temporal GNNs to web traffic forecasting to improve results using temporal information. Finally, the chapter describes another temporal GNN architecture specifically designed for dynamic graphs and applies it to the task of  epidemic forecasting. 
 Chapter 14 ,  Explaining Graph Neural Networks , covers various techniques to better understand the predictions and behavior of a GNN model. The chapter highlights two popular explanation methods: GNNExplainer and integrated gradients. Then, you will see the application of these techniques on a graph classification task using the MUTAG dataset and a node classification task using the Twitch  social network. 
 Chapter 15 ,  Forecasting Traffic Using A3T-GCN , focuses on the application of Temporal Graph Neural Networks in the field of traffic forecasting. It highlights the importance of accurate traffic forecasts in smart cities and the challenges of traffic forecasting due to complex spatial and temporal dependencies. The chapter covers the steps involved in processing a new dataset to create a temporal graph and the implementation of a new type of temporal GNN to predict future traffic speed. Finally, the results are compared to a baseline solution to verify the relevance of  the architecture. 
 Chapter 16 ,  Detecting Anomalies Using Heterogeneous GNNs , focuses on the application of GNNs in anomaly detection. GNNs, with their ability to capture complex relationships, make them well-suited for detecting anomalies and can handle large amounts of data efficiently. In this chapter, you will learn how to implement a GNN for intrusion detection in computer networks using the CIDDS-001 dataset. The chapter covers processing the dataset, building relevant features, implementing a heterogenous GNN, and evaluating the results to determine its effectiveness in detecting anomalies in  network traffic. 
 Chapter 17 ,  Recommending Books Using LightGCN , focuses on the application of GNNs in recommender systems. The goal of recommender systems is to provide personalized recommendations to users based on their interests and past interactions. GNNs are well-suited for this task as they can effectively incorporate complex relationships between users and items. In this chapter, the LightGCN architecture is introduced as a GNN specifically designed for recommender systems. Using the Book-Crossing dataset, the chapter demonstrates how to build a book recommender system with collaborative filtering using the  LightGCN architecture. 
 Chapter 18 ,  Unlocking the Potential of Graph Neural Networks for Real-Word Applications , summarizes what we have learned throughout the book, and looks ahead to the future  of GNNs. 
 To get the most out of this book 
 You should have a basic understanding of graph theory and machine learning concepts, such as supervised and unsupervised learning, training, and the evaluation of models to maximize your learning experience. Familiarity with deep learning frameworks, such as PyTorch, will also be useful, although not essential, as the book will provide a comprehensive introduction to the mathematical concepts and  their implementation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Software covered in  the book 
 
 
 Operating  system requirements 
 
 
 
 
 Python 3.8.15 
 
 
 Windows, macOS,  or Linux 
 
 
 
 
 PyTorch 1.13.1 
 
 
 Windows, macOS,  or Linux 
 
 
 
 
 PyTorch  Geometric 2.2.0 
 
 
 Windows, macOS,  or Linux 
 
 
 
 
 To install Python 3.8.15, you can download the latest version from the official Python website:  https://www.python.org/downloads/ . We strongly recommend using a virtual environment, such as  venv   or  conda . 
 Optionally, if you want to use a  Graphics Processing Unit  ( GPU ) from NVIDIA to accelerate training and inference, you will need to install  CUDA   and  cuDNN : 
 CUDA is a parallel computing platform and API developed by NVIDIA for general computing on GPUs. To install CUDA, you can follow the instructions on the NVIDIA  website:  https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-downloads . 
 cuDNN is a library developed by NVIDIA, which provides highly optimized GPU implementations of primitives for deep learning algorithms. To install cuDNN, you need to create an account on the NVIDIA website and download the library from the cuDNN download  page:  https://developer.nvidia.com/cudnn . 
 You can check out the list of CUDA-enabled GPU products on the NVIDIA  website:  https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-gpus . 
 To install PyTorch 1.13.1, you can follow the instructions on the official PyTorch website:  https://pytorch.org/ . You can choose the installation method that is most appropriate for your system (including CUDA  and cuDNN). 
 To install PyTorch Geometric 2.2.0, you can follow the instructions in the GitHub repository:  https://pytorch-geometric.readthedocs.io/en/2.2.0/notes/installation.xhtml . You will need to have PyTorch installed on your  system first. 
 Chapter 11  requires TensorFlow 2.4. To install it, you can follow the instructions on the official TensorFlow website:  https://www.tensorflow.org/install . You can choose the installation method that is most appropriate for your system and the version of TensorFlow you want  to use. 
 Chapter 14  requires an older version of PyTorch Geometric (version 2.0.4). It is recommended to create a specific virtual environment for  this chapter. 
 Chapter 15 ,  Chapter 16 , and  Chapter 17  require a high GPU memory usage. You can lower it by decreasing the size of the training set in  the code. 
 Other Python libraries are required in some or most chapters. You can install them using  pip install <name==version> , or using another installer depending on your configuration (such as  conda ). Here is the complete list of required packages with the  corresponding versions: 
 
 pandas ==1.5.2 
 gensim ==4.3.0 
 networkx ==2.8.8 
 matplotlib ==3.6.3 
 node2vec ==0.4.6 
 seaborn ==0.12.2 
 scikit-learn ==1.2.0 
 deepchem ==2.7.1 
 torch-geometric-temporal ==0.54.0 
 captum ==0.6.0 
 
 The complete list of requirements is available on GitHub at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python . Alternatively, you can directly import notebooks in Google Colab  at  https://colab.research.google.com . 
 If you are using the digital version of this book, we advise you to type the code yourself or access the code from the book’s GitHub repository (a link is available in the next section). Doing so will help you avoid any potential errors related to the copying and pasting  of code. 
 Download the example code files 
 You can download the example code files for this book from GitHub at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python . If there’s an update to the code, it will be updated in the  GitHub repository. 
 We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos available at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/ . Check  them out! 
 Download the color images 
 We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots and diagrams used in this book. You can download it  here:  https://packt.link/gaFU6 . 
 Conventions used 
 There are a number of text conventions used throughout  this book. 
 Code in text : Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles. Here is an example: “We initialize two lists ( visited  and  queue ) and add the  starting node.” 
 A block of code is set  as follows: 
 
DG = nx.DiGraph()
DG.add_edges_from([('A', 'B'), ('A', 'C'), ('B', 'D'), ('B', 'E'), ('C', 'F'), ('C', 'G')]) 
 Tips or important notes 
 Appear like this. 
 Get in touch 
 Feedback from our readers is  always welcome. 
 General feedback : If you have questions about any aspect of this book, email us at  customercare@packtpub.com  and mention the book title in the subject of  your message. 
 Errata : Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do happen. If you have found a mistake in this book, we would be grateful if you would report this to us. Please visit  www.packtpub.com/support/errata  and fill in  the form. 
 Piracy : If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the location address or website name. Please contact us at  copyright@packt.com  with a link to  the material. 
 If you are interested in becoming an author : If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, please  visit  authors.packtpub.com . 
 Share your thoughts 
 Once you’ve read Hands-On Graph Neural Networks Using Python, we’d love to hear your thoughts! Please  click here to go straight to the Amazon review page  for this book and share  your feedback. 
 Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make sure we’re delivering excellent  quality content. 
 Download a free PDF copy of this book 
 Thanks for purchasing  this book! 
 Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print  books everywhere? 
 Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of  your choice? 
 Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of that book at  no cost. 
 Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from your favorite technical books directly into your application.  
 The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts, newsletters, and great free content in your  inbox daily 
 Follow these simple steps to get  the benefits: 
 
 Scan the QR code or visit the link below 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 https://packt.link/free-ebook/9781804617526 
 
 Submit your proof of purchase 
 That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email directly 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 Part 1: Introduction to Graph Learning 
 In recent years, graph representation of data has become increasingly prevalent across various domains, from social networks to molecular biology. It is crucial to have a deep understanding of  Graph Neural Networks  ( GNNs ), which are designed specifically to handle graph-structured data, to unlock the full potential of  this representation. 
 This first part consists of two chapters and serves as a solid foundation for the rest of the book. It introduces the concepts of graph learning and GNNs and their relevance in numerous tasks and industries. It also covers the fundamental concepts of graph theory and its applications in graph learning, such as graph centrality measures. This part also highlights the unique features and performance of the GNN architecture compared to  other methods. 
 By the end of this part, you will have a solid understanding of the importance of GNNs in solving many real-world problems. You will be acquainted with the essentials of graph learning and how it is used in various domains. Furthermore, you will have a comprehensive overview of the main concepts of graph theory that we will use in later chapters. With this solid foundation, you will be well equipped to move on to the more advanced concepts in graph learning and GNNs in the following parts of  the book. 
 This part comprises the  following chapters: 
 
 Chapter 1 , Getting Started with Graph Learning 
 Chapter 2 , Graph Theory for Graph Neural Networks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 1 
 Getting Started with Graph Learning 
 Welcome to the first chapter of our journey into the world of  graph neural networks  ( GNNs ). In this chapter, we  will delve into the foundations of GNNs and understand why they are crucial tools in modern data analysis and machine learning. To that end, we will answer three essential questions that will provide us with a comprehensive understanding  of GNNs. 
 First, we will explore the significance of graphs as a representation of data, and why they are widely used in various domains such as computer science, biology, and finance. Next, we will delve into the importance of graph learning, where we will understand the different applications of graph learning and the different families of graph learning techniques. Finally, we will focus on the GNN family, highlighting its unique features, performance, and how it stands out compared to  other methods. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will have a clear understanding of why GNNs are important and how they can be used to solve real-world problems. You will also be equipped with the knowledge and skills you need to dive deeper into more advanced topics. So, let’s  get started! 
 In this chapter, we will cover the following  main topics: 
 
 Why graphs? 
 Why  graph learning? 
 Why graph  neural networks? 
 
 Why graphs? 
 The first question we need to  address is: why are we interested in graphs in the first place?  Graph theory , the  mathematical study of graphs, has emerged as a fundamental tool for understanding complex systems and relationships. A graph is a visual representation of a  collection of  nodes  (also  called  vertices ) and  edges  that  connect these nodes, providing a structure to represent entities and their relationships (see  Figure 1 .1 ). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1.1 – Example of a graph with six nodes and five edges 
 By representing a complex system as a network of entities with interactions, we can analyze their relationships, allowing us to gain a deeper understanding of their underlying structures and patterns. The versatility of graphs makes them a popular choice in various  domains, including  the following: 
 
 Computer science, where  graphs can be used to model the structure of computer programs, making it easier to understand how different components of a system interact with  each other 
 Physics, where graphs can be used to model physical systems and their interactions, such as the relationship between particles and  their properties 
 Biology, where graphs can be used to model biological systems, such as metabolic pathways, as a network of  interconnected entities 
 Social sciences, where graphs can be used to study and understand complex social networks, including the relationships between individuals in  a community 
 Finance, where graphs can be used to analyze stock market trends and relationships between different  financial instruments 
 Engineering, where graphs can be used to model and analyze complex systems, such as  transportation networks and electrical  power grids 
 
 These domains naturally exhibit a relational structure. For instance, graphs are a natural representation of social networks: nodes are users, and edges represent friendships. But graphs are so  versatile they can also be applied to domains where the relational structure is less natural, unlocking new insights  and understanding. 
 For example, images can be represented as a graph, as in  Figure 1 .2 . Each pixel is a node, and edges represent relationships between neighboring pixels. This allows for the application of graph-based algorithms to image processing and computer  vision tasks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1.2 – Left: original image; right: graph representation of this image 
 Similarly, a sentence can be transformed into a graph, where nodes are words and edges represent relationships between adjacent words. This approach is useful in natural language processing and information retrieval tasks, where the context and meaning of words are  critical factors. 
 Unlike text  and images, graphs do not have a fixed structure. However, this flexibility also makes graphs more challenging to handle. The absence of a fixed structure means they can have an arbitrary number of nodes and edges, with no specific ordering. In addition, graphs can represent dynamic data, where the connections between entities can change over time. For example, the relationships between users and products can change as they interact with each other. In this scenario, nodes and edges are updated to reflect changes in the real world, such as new users, new products, and   new relationships. 
 In the next section, we will delve deeper into how to use graphs with machine learning to create  valuable applications. 
 Why graph learning? 
 Graph learning is the  application of machine learning techniques to graph data. This study area encompasses a range of tasks aimed at understanding and manipulating graph-structured data. There are many graphs learning tasks, including  the following: 
 
 Node classification  is a  task that involves predicting the category (class) of a node in a graph. For example, it can  categorize online users or items based on their characteristics. In this task, the model is trained on a set of labeled nodes and their attributes, and it uses this information to predict the class of  unlabeled nodes. 
 Link prediction  is a task  that involves  predicting missing links between pairs of nodes in a graph. This is useful in knowledge graph completion, where the goal is to complete a graph of entities and their relationships. For example, it can be used to predict the relationships between people based on their social network connections ( friend recommendation). 
 Graph classification  is a  task that involves categorizing different graphs into predefined categories. One example  of this is in molecular biology, where molecular structures can be represented as graphs, and the goal is to predict their properties for drug design. In this task, the model is trained on a set of labeled graphs and their attributes, and it uses this information to categorize  unseen graphs. 
 Graph generation  is a task that  involves generating new graphs based on a set of desired properties. One of the main applications is generating novel molecular structures for drug discovery. This is  achieved by training a model on a set of existing molecular structures and then using it to generate new, unseen structures. The generated structures can be evaluated for their potential as drug candidates an d  further studied. 
 
 Graph learning has many other practical applications that can have a significant impact. One of the most well-known  applications is  recommender systems , where graph learning algorithms recommend relevant items to users based on their previous interactions and relationships with other items. Another important  application is  traffic forecasting , where graph learning can improve travel time predictions by considering the complex relationships between different routes and modes  of transportation. 
 The versatility and potential of graph learning make it an exciting field of research and development. The study of graphs has advanced rapidly in recent years, driven by the availability of large datasets, powerful  computing resources, and advancements in machine learning and artificial intelligence. As a result, we can list four prominent families of graph learning  techniques [1]: 
 
 Graph signal processing , which applies traditional signal  processing methods to graphs, such as the graph Fourier  transform and spectral analysis. These techniques reveal the intrinsic properties of the graph, such as its connectivity  and structure. 
 Matrix factorization , which seeks to find low-dimensional representations of large matrices. The goal of matrix  factorization is to identify latent factors or patterns that explain the observed  relationships in the original matrix. This approach can provide a compact and interpretable representation of  the data. 
 Random walk , which  refers to a  mathematical concept used to model the movement of entities in a graph. By simulating random walks over a graph, information about the relationships between nodes can be gathered. This is why they are often used to generate training data for  machine  learning models. 
 Deep learning , which is a  subfield of machine learning that focuses on neural networks with multiple layers. Deep learning  methods can effectively encode and represent graph data as vectors. These vectors can then be used in various tasks with  remarkable performance. 
 
 It is important to note that these techniques are not mutually exclusive and often overlap in their applications. In practice, they are often combined to form hybrid models that leverage the strengths of each. For example, matrix factorization and deep learning techniques might be used in combination to learn low-dimensional representations of  graph-structured data. 
 As we delve into the world of graph learning, it is crucial to understand the fundamental building block of any machine learning technique: the dataset. Traditional  tabular datasets, such as spreadsheets, represent data as rows and columns with each row representing a single data point. However, in many real-world scenarios, the relationships between data points are just as meaningful as the data points themselves. This is where  graph datasets come in. Graph datasets represent data points as nodes in a graph and the relationships between those data points  as edges. 
 Let’s take the tabular dataset shown in  Figure 1 .3  as  an example. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1.3 – Family tree as a tabular dataset versus a graph dataset 
 This  dataset represents information about five members of a family. Each member has three features (or attributes): name, age, and gender. However, the tabular version of this dataset doesn’t show the connections between these people. On the contrary, the  graph version represents them with edges, which allows us to understand the relationships in this family. In many contexts, the connections between nodes are crucial in understanding the data, which is why representing data in graph form is becoming  increasingly popular. 
 Now that we have a basic understanding of graph machine learning and the different types of tasks it involves, we can move on to exploring one of the most important approaches for solving these tasks:  graph  neural networks . 
 Why graph neural networks? 
 In this book, we will focus on the deep learning family of graph learning techniques, often referred to as graph neural networks. GNNs are a new category of deep learning architecture and are  specifically designed for graph-structured data. Unlike traditional deep learning algorithms, which have been primarily developed for text and images, GNNs are explicitly made to process and analyze graph datasets (see  Figure 1 .4 ). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1.4 – High-level architecture of a GNN pipeline, with a graph as input and an output that corresponds to a given task 
 GNNs have emerged as a powerful tool for graph learning and have shown excellent results in various tasks and industries. One of the most striking examples is how a GNN model identified a new antibiotic [2]. The model was trained on 2,500 molecules and was tested on a library of 6,000 compounds. It  predicted that a molecule called halicin should be able to kill many  antibiotic-resistant bacteria while having low toxicity to human cells. Based on this prediction, the researchers used halicin to treat mice infected with antibiotic-resistant bacteria. They demonstrated its effectiveness and believe the model could be used to design  new drugs. 
 How do GNNs work? Let’s take the example of a node classification task in a social network, like the previous family tree ( Figure 1 .3 ). In a node classification task, GNNs take advantage of information from different sources to create a vector representation of each node in the graph. This representation encompasses not only the original node features (such as name, age, and gender) but also information from edge features (such as the strength of relationships between nodes) and global features (such as  network-wide statistics). 
 This is why GNNs are more efficient than traditional machine learning techniques on graphs. Instead of being limited to the original attributes, GNNs enrich the original node features with attributes from neighboring nodes, edges, and global features, making the representation much more comprehensive and meaningful. The new node representations are then used to perform a specific task, such as node classification, regression, or  link prediction. 
 Specifically, GNNs define a graph convolution operation that aggregates information from the neighboring nodes and edges to update the node representation. This operation is performed iteratively, allowing the model to learn more complex relationships  between nodes as the number of iterations increases. For example,  Figure 1 .5  shows how a GNN would calculate the representation of node  5  using  neighboring nodes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1.5 – Left: input graph; right: computation graph representing how a GNN computes the representation of node 5 based on its neighbors 
 It is worth noting that  Figure 1 .5  provides a simplified illustration of a computation graph. In reality, there are various kinds of GNNs and GNN layers, each of which has a unique structure and way of aggregating information from neighboring nodes. These different variants of GNNs also have their own advantages and limitations and are well-suited for specific types of graph data and tasks. When selecting the appropriate GNN architecture for a  particular problem, it is crucial to understand the characteristics of the graph data and the  desired outcome. 
 More generally, GNNs, like other deep learning techniques, are most effective when applied to specific problems. These problems are characterized by high complexity, meaning that learning good representations is critical to solving the task at hand. For example, a highly complex task could be recommending the right products among billions of options to millions of customers. On the other hand, some problems, such as finding the youngest member of our family tree, can be solved without any machine  learning technique. 
 Furthermore, GNNs require a substantial amount of data to perform effectively. Traditional machine learning techniques might be a better fit in cases where the dataset is small, as they are less reliant on large amounts of data. However, these techniques do not scale as well as  GNNs. GNNs can process bigger datasets thanks to parallel and distributed training. They can also exploit the additional information more efficiently, which produces  better results. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we answered three main questions: why graphs, why graph learning, and why graph neural networks? First, we explored the versatility of graphs in representing various data types, such as social networks and transportation networks, but also text and images. We discussed the different applications of graph learning, including node classification and graph classification, and highlighted the four main families of graph learning techniques. Finally, we emphasized the significance of GNNs and their superiority over other techniques, especially regarding large, complex datasets. By answering these three main questions, we aimed to provide a comprehensive overview of the importance of GNNs and why they are becoming vital tools in  machine learning. 
 In  Chapter 2 ,  Graph Theory for Graph Neural Networks , we will dive deeper into the basics of graph theory, which provides the foundation for understanding GNNs. This chapter will cover the fundamental concepts of graph theory, including concepts such as adjacency matrices and degrees. Additionally, we will delve into the different types of graphs and their applications, such as directed and undirected graphs, and weighted and  unweighted graphs. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] F. Xia et al.,  Graph Learning: A Survey , IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 109–127, Apr. 2021, DOI: 10.1109/tai.2021.3076021. Available  at  https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.00696 
 [2] A. Trafton,  Artificial intelligence yields new antibiotic , MIT News, 20-Feb-2020. [Online]. Available  at  https://news.mit.edu/2020/artificial-intelligence-identifies-new-antibiotic-0220 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 2 
 Graph Theory for Graph Neural Networks 
 Graph theory   is a fundamental branch of mathematics that deals with the study of graphs and networks. A graph  is a visual representation of complex data structures that helps us understand the relationships between different entities. Graph theory provides us with tools to model and analyze a vast array of real-world problems, such as transportation systems, social networks, and  internet connectivity. 
 In this chapter, we will delve into the essentials of graph theory, covering three main topics: graph properties, graph concepts, and graph algorithms. We will begin by defining graphs and their components. We will then introduce the different types of graphs and explain their properties and applications. Next, we will cover fundamental graph concepts, objects, and measures, including the adjacency matrix. Finally, we will dive into graph algorithms, focusing on the  two fundamental  algorithms,  breadth-first search  ( BFS ) and  depth-first  search  ( DFS ). 
 By the end of this chapter, you will have a solid foundation in graph theory, allowing you to tackle more advanced topics and design graph  neural networks. 
 In this chapter, we will cover the following  main topics: 
 
 Introducing  graph properties 
 Discovering  graph concepts 
 Exploring  graph algorithms 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter02 . 
 The installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  of  this book. 
 Introducing graph properties 
 In graph  theory, a graph  is a mathematical structure consisting of a set of objects, called  vertices  or  nodes , and a  set of connections, called  edges , which  link pairs of vertices. The notation   is used to represent a  graph, where   is the graph,   is the set of vertices, and   is the set  of edges. 
 The nodes of a graph can represent any objects, such as cities, people, web pages, or molecules, and the edges represent the relationships or connections between them, such as physical roads, social relationships, hyperlinks, or  chemical bonds. 
 This section provides an overview of fundamental graph properties that will be used extensively in  later chapters. 
 Directed graphs 
 One of the  most basic  properties of a graph is whether it is directed or undirected. In a  directed graph , also called a  digraph , each edge has a direction or orientation. This means that the edge  connects two nodes in a particular direction, where one node is the source and the other is the destination. In contrast, an undirected graph has undirected edges, where the edges have no direction. This means that the edge between two vertices can be traversed in either direction, and the order in which we visit the nodes does  not matter. 
 In Python, we can use the  networkx  library to define an undirected graph as follows  with  nx.Graph() : 
 
import networkx as nx
G = nx.Graph()
G.add_edges_from([('A', 'B'), ('A', 'C'), ('B', 'D'),  
('B', 'E'), ('C', 'F'), ('C', 'G')]) 
 The  G  graph  corresponds  to the  following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2.1 – Example of an undirected graph 
 The code to create a directed graph is similar; we simply replace  nx.Graph()   with  nx.DiGraph() : 
 
DG = nx.DiGraph()
DG.add_edges_from([('A', 'B'), ('A', 'C'), ('B', 'D'),  
('B', 'E'), ('C', 'F'), ('C', 'G')]) 
 The  DG  graph corresponds to the  following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2.2 – Example of a directed graph 
 In  directed graphs, edges  are typically represented using arrows to denote their orientation, as in  Figure 2 .2 . 
 Weighted graphs 
 Another  important property of graphs is whether the edges are weighted or unweighted. In a  weighted graph , each  edge has a weight or cost associated with it. These weights can represent various factors, such as distance, travel time,  or cost. 
 For example, in a transportation network, the weights of edges might represent the distances between different cities or the time it takes to travel between them. In contrast, unweighted graphs have no weight associated with their edges. These types of graphs are commonly used in situations where the relationships between nodes are binary, and the edges simply indicate the presence or absence of a connection  between them. 
 We can modify the  previous undirected graph to add weights to our edges. In  networkx , the edges of the graph are defined with a tuple containing the start and  end nodes and a dictionary specifying the  edge’s weight: 
 
WG = nx.Graph()
WG.add_edges_from([('A', 'B', {"weight": 10}), ('A', 'C', {"weight": 20}), ('B', 'D', {"weight": 30}), ('B', 'E', {"weight": 40}), ('C', 'F', {"weight": 50}), ('C', 'G', {"weight": 60})])
labels = nx.get_edge_attributes(WG, "weight") 
 The  WG  graph  corresponds to  the  following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2.3 – Example of a weighted graph 
 Connected graphs 
 Graph  connectivity is a fundamental  concept in graph theory that is closely related to the graph’s structure  and function. 
 In a  connected graph , there is  a path between any two vertices in the graph. Formally, a   graph is connected if, and only if, for every pair of   and   vertices in  , there  exists a path from   to  . In contrast, a graph is disconnected if it is not connected, which means that at least two vertices are not connected by  a path. 
 The  networkx  library provides a built-in function for verifying whether a graph is connected or not. In the following example, the first graph contains isolated nodes ( 4  and  5 ), unlike the second graph. This is visualized in  Figure 2 .4 : 
 
G1 = nx.Graph()
G1.add_edges_from([(1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 1), (4, 5)])
print(f"Is graph 1 connected? {nx.is_connected(G1)}")
G2 = nx.Graph()
G2.add_edges_from([(1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 1), (1, 4)])
print(f"Is graph 2 connected? {nx.is_connected(G2)}") 
 This code prints the  following output: 
 
 Is graph 1 connected? False 
 Is graph 2 connected? True 
 The first graph  is disconnected because of nodes  4  and  5 . On the other hand, the  second graph is connected. This property is easy to visualize with small graphs, as in the  following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2.4 – Left: graph 1 with isolated nodes (disconnected graph); right: graph 2 where each node is connected to at least another one (connected graph) 
 Connected graphs have several interesting properties and applications. For example, in a communication network, a connected graph ensures that any two nodes can communicate with each other through a path. In contrast, disconnected graphs can have isolated nodes that cannot communicate with other nodes in the network, making it challenging to  design  efficient  routing algorithms. 
 There are different ways to measure the connectivity of a graph. One of the most common measures is the minimum number of edges that need to be removed to disconnect the graph, which is known as the graph’s minimum cut. The minimum cut problem has several applications in network flow optimization, clustering, and  community detection. 
 Types of graphs 
 In addition to the commonly used graph types, there are some special types of graphs that have unique properties  and characteristics: 
 
 A  tree  is a  connected, undirected  graph with no cycles (like the graph in  Figure 2 .1 ). Since there is only one path between any two nodes in a tree, a tree is a special case of a graph. Trees are often used to model hierarchical structures, such as family trees, organizational structures, or  classification trees. 
 A  rooted tree  is  a tree in which one node is designated as the root, and all other  vertices are connected to it by a unique path. Rooted trees are often used in computer science to represent hierarchical data structures, such as filesystems or the structure of  XML documents. 
 A  directed acyclic graph  ( DAG ) is a  directed graph that has  no cycles (like the graph in  Figure 2 .2 ). This means that the edges can only be traversed in a particular direction, and there are no loops or cycles. DAGs are often used to model dependencies between tasks or events – for example, in project management or in computing the critical path of  a job. 
 A  bipartite graph  is a  graph in which the vertices can be divided into two disjoint sets, such that all edges connect vertices in different sets. Bipartite graphs are often used in mathematics and computer science to model relationships between two different types of objects, such as buyers and sellers, or employees  and projects. 
 A  complete graph  is a graph  in which every pair of vertices is connected by an  edge. Complete graphs are often used in combinatorics to model problems involving all possible pairwise connections, and in computer networks to model fully  connected networks. 
 
 Figure 2 .5  illustrates these  different types  of graphs: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2.5 – Common types of graphs 
 Now that we have  reviewed essential types of graphs, let’s move on to exploring some of the most important graph objects. Understanding these concepts will help us analyze and manipulate  graphs effectively. 
 Discovering graph concepts 
 In this section, we will explore some of the essential concepts in graph theory, including graph objects (such as degree and neighbors), graph measures (such as centrality and density), and the adjacency  matrix representation. 
 Fundamental objects 
 One of the key  concepts in graph theory  is the  degree  of a node, which is the number of  edges  incident  to this node. An edge is said  to be incident on a node if that node is one of the edge’s endpoints. The degree of a node   is often denoted by  . It can be defined for both directed and  undirected graphs: 
 
 In an undirected graph, the degree of a vertex is the number of edges that are connected to it. Note that if the node is connected to itself (called  a  loop , or  self-loop ), it adds  two to  the degree. 
 In a directed graph, the degree is divided into two  types:  indegree  and  outdegree . The indegree (denoted by  ) of a node represents the number of edges that point towards that node, while the outdegree (denoted by  ) represents the number of edges that start from that node. In this case, a self-loop  adds one to the indegree and to  the outdegree. 
 
 Indegree and outdegree are essential for analyzing and understanding directed graphs, as they provide insight into how information or resources are distributed within the graph. For example, nodes with high indegree are likely to be important sources of information or resources. In contrast, nodes with high outdegree are likely to be important destinations or consumers of information  or resources. 
 In  networkx , we can simply calculate the node degree, indegree, or outdegree using built-in methods. Let’s do it for the undirected graph from  Figure 2 .1  and the directed graph from  Figure 2 .2 : 
 
G = nx.Graph()
G.add_edges_from([('A', 'B'), ('A', 'C'), ('B', 'D'), ('B', 'E'), ('C', 'F'), ('C', 'G')])
print(f"deg(A) = {G.degree['A']}")
DG = nx.DiGraph()
DG.add_edges_from([('A', 'B'), ('A', 'C'), ('B', 'D'), ('B', 'E'), ('C', 'F'), ('C', 'G')])
print(f"deg^-(A) = {DG.in_degree['A']}")
print(f"deg^+(A) = {DG.out_degree['A']}") 
 This code prints the  following output: 
 
 deg(A) = 2 
 deg^-(A) = 0 
 deg^+(A) = 2 
 We can compare it  to the graphs from  Figures 2.1  and  2.2 : node   is connected to two edges ( ), but is not the destination of any of  them ( ). 
 The concept of node degree is related to that  of  neighbors . Neighbors refer to the nodes directly connected to a particular node through an edge. Moreover, two nodes are said  to be  adjacent  if they share at least one common neighbor. The concepts of neighbors and adjacency are fundamental to many graph algorithms and applications, such as searching  for a  path  between two nodes or identifying clusters in  a network. 
 In graph theory, a  path is a sequence of edges that connect two nodes (or more) in a graph. The length of a path is the number of edges that are traversed along the path. There are different types of paths, but two of them are  particularly important: 
 
 A  simple path  is a  path that does not visit any node more than once, except for the start and  end vertices 
 A  cycle  is a  path in which the first and last vertices are the same. A graph is said to be acyclic if it contains no cycles (such as trees  and DAGs) 
 
 Degrees  and paths can be  used to determine the importance of a node in a network. This  measure is referred  to  as  centrality . 
 Graph measures 
 Centrality quantifies  the importance of a vertex or node in a network. It helps us to identify key nodes in a graph based on their connectivity and influence on the flow of information or interactions within the network. There are several measures of centrality, each providing a different perspective on the importance of  a node: 
 
 Degree centrality  is  one of the simplest and most  commonly used measures of centrality. It is simply defined as the degree of the node. A high degree centrality indicates that a vertex is highly connected to other vertices in the graph, and thus significantly influences  the network. 
 Closeness centrality  measures  how close a node is to all other nodes in the graph. It corresponds to the average length of the shortest  path between the target node and all other nodes in the graph. A node with high closeness centrality can quickly reach all other vertices in  the network. 
 Betweenness centrality  measures  the number of times a node  lies on the shortest path between pairs of other nodes in the graph. A node with high betweenness centrality acts as a bottleneck or bridge between different parts of  the graph. 
 
 Let’s calculate these measures on our previous graphs using the built-in functions of  networkx  and analyze  the result: 
 
print(f"Degree centrality      = {nx.degree_centrality(G)}")
print(f"Closeness centrality   = {nx.closeness_centrality(G)}")
print(f"Betweenness centrality = {nx.betweenness_centrality(G)}") 
 The  previous code  prints the dictionaries, containing a score for  each node: 
 
 Degree centrality      = {'A': 0.333, 'B': 0.5, 'C': 0.5, 'D': 0.167, 'E': 0.167, 'F': 0.167, 'G': 0.167} 
 Closeness centrality   = {'A': 0.6, 'B': 0.545, 'C': 0.545, 'D': 0.375, 'E': 0.375, 'F': 0.375, 'G': 0.375} 
 Betweenness centrality = {'A': 0.6, 'B': 0.6, 'C': 0.6, 'D': 0.0, 'E': 0.0, 'F': 0.0, 'G': 0.0} 
 The importance of nodes  ,  , and   in a graph depends on the type of centrality used. Degree centrality  considers nodes   and   to be more important because  they have more neighbors than node  . However, in closeness  centrality, node   is the  most important as it can reach any other node in the  graph in the shortest possible path. On the other hand, nodes  ,   and   have equal betweenness centrality, as they  all lie on a large number of shortest paths between  other nodes. 
 In addition to these measures, we will see how to calculate the importance of a node using machine learning techniques in the next chapters. However, it is not the only measure we  will cover. 
 Indeed,  density  is another  important measure, indicating how connected a graph is. It is a ratio between the actual number of edges and the maximum possible number of edges in the graph. A graph  with high density is considered more connected and has more information flow compared to a graph with  low density. 
 The formula to calculate density depends on whether the graph is directed or undirected. For an undirected graph with   nodes, the maximum possible number of edges is  . For a directed graph with   nodes, the maximum number of edges  is  . 
 The density of a graph is  calculated as the number of edges divided by the maximum number of edges. For example, the graph in  Figure 2 .1  has   edges and the maximum possible number of   edges. Therefore, it has a density  of  . 
 A dense graph  has a density closer to 1, while a sparse graph  has a density closer to 0. There is no strict rule for what constitutes a dense or sparse graph, but generally, a graph is considered dense if its density is greater than 0.5 and sparse if its density is less than 0.1. This measure is directly connected to a fundamental problem with graphs: how to represent  the  adjacency matrix . 
 Adjacency matrix representation 
 An adjacency matrix is  a matrix that represents the edges in a graph, where each cell indicates whether there is an edge between two nodes. The matrix is a square matrix of size  , where   is the number of nodes in the graph. A value of   in the cell   indicates that there is an edge between node   and node  , while a value of   indicates that there is no edge. For an undirected graph, the matrix is symmetric, while for a directed graph, the matrix is not  necessarily symmetric. 
 The following figure indicates the adjacency matrix associated with  the graph: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2.6 – Example of the adjacency matrix 
 In Python, it can be implemented as a list of lists, as shown in  this example: 
 
adj = [[0,1,1,0,0,0,0],
       [1,0,0,1,1,0,0],
       [1,0,0,0,0,1,1],
       [0,1,0,0,0,0,0],
       [0,1,0,0,0,0,0],
       [0,0,1,0,0,0,0],
       [0,0,1,0,0,0,0]] 
 The adjacency matrix is  a straightforward representation that can be easily visualized as a 2D array. One of the key advantages of using an adjacency matrix is that checking whether two nodes are connected is a constant time operation. This makes it an efficient way to test the existence of an edge in the graph. Moreover, it is used to perform matrix operations, which are useful for certain graph algorithms, such as calculating the shortest path between  two nodes. 
 However, adding or removing nodes can be costly, as the matrix needs to be resized or shifted. One of the main drawbacks of using an adjacency matrix is its space complexity: as the number of nodes in the graph grows, the space required to store the adjacency matrix increases exponentially. Formally, we say that the adjacency matrix has a space complexity of  , where   represents the number of nodes in  the graph. 
 Overall, while the adjacency matrix is a useful data structure for representing small graphs, it may not be practical for larger ones due to its space complexity. Additionally, the overhead of adding or removing nodes can make it inefficient for dynamically  changing graphs. 
 This is why other  representations can be helpful. For example, another popular way to store graphs is the  edge list . An edge list  is a list of all the edges in a graph. Each edge is represented by a tuple or a pair of vertices. The edge list can also include the weight or cost of each edge. This is the data structure we used to create our graphs  with  networkx : 
 
edge_list = [(0, 1), (0, 2), (1, 3), (1, 4), (2, 5), (2, 6)] 
 When we compare both data structures applied to our graph, it is clear that the edge list is less verbose. This is the case because our graph is fairly sparse. On the other hand, if our graph was complete, we would require 21 tuples instead of 6. This is explained by a space complexity of  , where   is the number of edges. Edge lists are more efficient for storing sparse graphs, where the number of edges is much smaller than the number  of nodes. 
 However, checking whether two vertices are connected in an edge list requires iterating through the entire list, which can be time-consuming for large graphs with many edges. Therefore, edge lists are more commonly used in applications where space is  a concern. 
 A third and popular representation is  the  adjacency list . It consists of a list of pairs, where each pair represents a node in the graph and its adjacent nodes. The pairs can be stored in a linked list, dictionary, or other data structures, depending on the implementation. For example, an adjacency list for our graph might look  like this: 
 
adj_list = {
    0: [1, 2],
    1: [0, 3, 4],
    2: [0, 5, 6],
    3: [1],
    4: [1],
    5: [2],
    6: [2]
} 
 An  adjacency list has several advantages over an adjacency matrix or an edge list. First, the space complexity is  , where   is the number of nodes and   is the number of edges. This is more efficient than the   space complexity of an adjacency matrix for sparse graphs. Second, it allows for efficient iteration through the adjacent vertices of a node, which is useful in many graph algorithms. Finally, adding a node or an edge can be done in  constant time. 
 However, checking whether two vertices are connected can be slower than with an adjacency matrix. This is because it requires iterating through the adjacency list of one of the vertices, which can be time-consuming for  large graphs. 
 Each data structure has its own advantages and disadvantages that depend on the specific application and requirements. In the next section, we will process graphs and introduce the two most fundamental  graph algorithms. 
 Exploring graph algorithms 
 Graph algorithms are critical  in solving problems related to graphs, such as finding the shortest path between two nodes or detecting cycles. This section will discuss two graph traversal algorithms: BFS  and DFS. 
 Breadth-first search 
 BFS is a graph  traversal algorithm that starts at the root node and explores all  the neighboring nodes at a particular level before moving to the next level of nodes. It works by maintaining a queue of nodes to visit and marking each visited node as it is added to the queue. The algorithm then dequeues the next node in the queue and explores all its neighbors, adding them to the queue if they haven’t been  visited yet. 
 The behavior of a BFS is illustrated in  Figure 2 .7 : 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2.7 – Example of graph traversal made by a breadth-first search 
 Let’s now  see how  we can implement it  in Python: 
 
 We create an empty graph and add edges with the  add_edges_from()  method: 
G = nx.Graph()
G.add_edges_from([('A', 'B'), ('A', 'C'), ('B', 'D'), ('B', 'E'), ('C', 'F'), ('C', 'G')]) 
 We define a function called  bfs()  that implements the BFS algorithm on a graph. The function takes two arguments: the  graph  object and the starting node for  the search: 
def bfs(graph, node): 
 We initialize two lists ( visited  and  queue ) and add the starting node. The  visited  list keeps track of the nodes that have been visited during the search, while the  queue  list stores the nodes that need to  be visited: 
    visited, queue = [node], [node] 
 We enter a  while  loop that continues until the  queue  list is empty. Inside the loop, we remove the first node in the  queue  list using the  pop(0)  method and store the result in the  node  variable: 
    while queue:
        node = queue.pop(0) 
 We  iterate through the neighbors of the node using a  for  loop. For each neighbor that has not been visited yet, we add it to the  visited  list and to the end of the  queue  list using the  append()  method. When  it’s complete, we return the  visited  list: 
        for neighbor in graph[node]:
            if neighbor not in visited:
                visited.append(neighbor)
                queue.append(neighbor)
    return visited 
 We call the  bfs()  function with the  G  argument and the  'A'   starting node: 
bfs(G, 'A') 
 The f unction returns the list of visited nodes in the order in which they  were visited: 
['A', 'B', 'C', 'D', 'E', 'F', 'G'] 
 
 The order we obtained is the one we anticipated in  Figure 2 .7 . 
 BFS is particularly useful in finding the shortest path between two nodes in an unweighted graph. This is because the algorithm visits nodes in order of their distance from the starting node, so the first time the target node is visited, it must be along the shortest path from the  starting node. 
 In addition to finding the shortest path, BFS can also be used to check whether a graph is connected or to find all connected components of a graph. It is also used in applications such as web crawlers, social network analysis, and shortest path routing  in networks. 
 The t ime complexity of BFS is  , where   is the number of nodes and   is the number of edges in the graph. This can be a significant issue for graphs with a high degree of connectivity or for graphs that are sparse. Several variants of BFS have been developed to mitigate this issue, such  as  bidirectional BFS  and  A*  search, which  use heuristics to reduce  the number of nodes that need to  be  explored. 
 Depth-first search 
 DFS is a recursive algorithm  that starts at the root node and explores as far as  possible along each branch  before backtracking. 
 It chooses a node and explores all of its unvisited neighbors, visiting the first neighbor that has not been explored and backtracking only when all the neighbors have been visited. By doing so, it explores the graph by following as deep a path from the starting node as possible before backtracking to explore other branches. This continues until all nodes have  been explored. 
 The behavior of a DFS is illustrated in  Figure 2 .8 : 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2.8 – Example of graph traversal made by a depth-first search 
 Let’s  implement  DFS  in Python: 
 
 We first initialize an empty list  called  visited : 
visited = [] 
 We define a function called  dfs()  that takes in  visited ,  graph , and  node   as arguments: 
def dfs(visited, graph, node): 
 If the current  node  is not in the  visited  list, we append it to  the list: 
    if node not in visited:
        visited.append(node) 
 We then iterate through each neighbor of the current  node . For each neighbor, we recursively call the  dfs()  function passing in  visited ,  graph , and the neighbor  as arguments: 
        for neighbor in graph[node]:
            visited = dfs(visited, graph, neighbor) 
 The  dfs()  function continues to explore the graph depth-first, visiting all the neighbors of each node until there are no more unvisited neighbors. Finally, the  visited  list  is returned: 
    return visited 
 We call the  dfs()  function with  visited  set to an empty list,  G  as the graph, and  'A'  as the  starting node: 
dfs(visited, G, 'A') 
 The function returns the list of visited nodes in the order in which they  were visited: 
 ['A', 'B', 'D', 'E', 'C', 'F', 'G'] 
 
 Once again, the  order we obtained is the one we anticipated in  Figure 2 .8 . 
 DFS is useful in solving various problems, such as finding connected components, topological sorting, and solving maze problems. It is particularly useful in finding cycles in a graph since it traverses the graph in a depth-first order, and a cycle exists if, and only if, a node is visited twice during  the traversal. 
 Like BFS, it has a  time complexity of  , where   is the number of nodes and   is the number of edges in the graph. It requires less memory but doesn’t guarantee the shallowest path solution. Finally, unlike BFS, you can be trapped in infinite loops  using DFS. 
 Additionally, many other algorithms in graph theory build upon BFS and DFS, such as Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm, Kruskal’s minimum spanning tree algorithm, and Tarjan’s strongly connected components algorithm. Therefore, a solid understanding of BFS and DFS is essential for anyone who wants to work with graphs and develop more advanced  graph algorithms. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we covered the essentials of graph theory, a branch of mathematics that studies graphs and networks. We began by defining what a graph is and explained the different types of graphs, such as directed, weighted, and connected graphs. We then introduced fundamental graph objects (including neighbors) and measures (such as centrality and density), which are used to understand and analyze  graph structures. 
 Additionally, we discussed the adjacency matrix and its different representations. Finally, we explored the two fundamental graph algorithms, BFS and DFS, which form the foundation for developing more complex  graph algorithms. 
 In  Chapter 3 ,  Creating Node Representations with DeepWalk , we will explore the DeepWalk architecture and its two components: Word2Vec and random walks. We will start by understanding the Word2Vec architecture and then implement it using a specialized library. Then, we will delve into the DeepWalk algorithm and implement random walks on  a graph. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 3 
 Creating Node Representations with DeepWalk 
 DeepWalk  is one of the first major  successful applications of  machine learning  ( ML ) techniques  to graph data. It introduces important concepts such as embeddings that are at the core of GNNs. Unlike traditional neural  networks, the goal of this architecture is to produce  representations  that are then fed to other models, which perform downstream tasks (for example,  node classification). 
 In this chapter, we will learn about the DeepWalk architecture and its two major components:  Word2Vec  and  random walks . We’ll explain  how the Word2Vec architecture works, with  a particular focus on the skip-gram model. We will implement this model with the popular  gensim  library on a  natural language processing  ( NLP ) example  to understand how it is supposed to  be used. 
 Then, we will focus on the DeepWalk algorithm and see how performance can be improved using  hierarchical softmax  ( H-Softmax ). This  powerful optimization of the softmax function can be found in many fields: it is incredibly useful when you have a lot of possible classes in your classification task. We will also implement random walks on a graph before wrapping things up with an end-to-end supervised classification exercise on Zachary’s  Karate Club. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will master Word2Vec in the context of NLP and beyond. You will be able to create node embeddings using the topological information of the graphs and solve classification tasks on  graph data. 
 In this chapter, we will cover the following  main topics: 
 
 Introducing Word2Vec 
 DeepWalk and  random walks 
 Implementing DeepWalk 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter03 . Installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  section of  this book. 
 Introducing Word2Vec 
 The first step to comprehending the  DeepWalk algorithm is to understand its major  component: Word2Vec. 
 Word2Vec has been one of the most influential deep-learning techniques in NLP. Published in 2013 by Tomas Mikolov et al. (Google) in two different papers, it proposed a new technique to translate words into  vectors (also known as  embeddings ) using large datasets of text. These representations can then be used in downstream tasks, such as sentiment classification. It is also one of the rare examples of patented and popular  ML architecture. 
 Here are a few examples of how Word2Vec can transform words  into vectors: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We can see in this example that, in terms of the Euclidian distance, the word vectors for  king  and  queen  are closer than the ones for  king  and  woman  (4.37 versus 8.47). In general, other metrics, such as the  popular  cosine similarity , are used to measure the likeness of these words. Cosine similarity focuses on the angle between vectors and does not consider their magnitude (length), which is more helpful in comparing them. Here is how it  is defined: 
 
 
 
 
 
 One of the most surprising results of Word2Vec is its ability to solve analogies. A popular example is how it can answer the question “ man is to woman, what king is to ___? ” It can be calculated  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is not true with any  analogy, but this property can bring interesting applications to perform arithmetic operations  with embeddings. 
 CBOW versus skip-gram 
 A model must be trained on a pretext task to  produce these vectors. The task itself does not need to be meaningful: its only goal is to produce high-quality  embeddings. In practice, this  task is always related to predicting words given a  certain context. 
 The authors proposed two architectures with  similar tasks: 
 
 The continuous bag-of-words (CBOW) model : This is trained to predict a word using its surrounding context (words coming before and after the target word). The order of  context words does not matter since their embeddings are summed in the model. The authors claim to obtain better results using four words before and after the one that  is predicted. 
 The continuous skip-gram model : Here, we feed a single word to the model and try to predict the words around it. Increasing the range of context words leads to  better embeddings  but also increases the  training time. 
 
 In summary, here are the  inputs and outputs of  both models: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3.1 – CBOW and skip-gram architectures 
 In general, the CBOW model is considered faster to train, but the skip-gram model is more accurate thanks to its ability to learn infrequent words. This topic is still debated in the NLP community: a different implementation could fix issues related to CBOW in  some contexts. 
 Creating skip-grams 
 For now, we will focus on  the skip-gram model since it is the architecture used by DeepWalk. Skip-grams  are implemented as pairs of words with the following structure:  , where   is the input and   is the word to predict. The number of skip grams for the same target word depends on a parameter called  context size , as  shown in  Figure 3 .2 : 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3.2 – Text to skip-grams 
 The same idea can be applied to a corpus of text instead of a  single sentence. 
 In practice, we store all the context words for the same target word in a list to save memory. Let’s see  how it’s done with an example on an  entire paragraph. 
 In the following example, we create skip-grams for an entire paragraph stored in the  text  variable. We set the  CONTEXT_SIZE  variable to  2 , which means we will look at the two words before and after our  target word: 
 
 Let’s start by importing the  necessary libraries: 
import numpy as np 
 Then, we need to set the  CONTEXT_SIZE  variable to  2  and bring in the text we want  to  analyze: 
CONTEXT_SIZE = 2
text = """Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Nunc eu sem scelerisque, dictum eros aliquam, accumsan quam. Pellentesque tempus, lorem ut semper fermentum, ante turpis accumsan ex, sit amet ultricies tortor erat quis nulla. Nunc consectetur ligula sit amet purus porttitor, vel tempus tortor scelerisque. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia curae; Quisque suscipit ligula nec faucibus accumsan. Duis vulputate massa sit amet viverra hendrerit. Integer maximus quis sapien id convallis. Donec elementum placerat ex laoreet gravida. Praesent quis enim facilisis, bibendum est nec, pharetra ex. Etiam pharetra congue justo, eget imperdiet diam varius non. Mauris dolor lectus, interdum in laoreet quis, faucibus vitae velit. Donec lacinia dui eget maximus cursus. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos. Vivamus tincidunt velit eget nisi ornare convallis. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Donec tristique ultrices tortor at accumsan.
""".split() 
 Next, we create the skip-grams thanks to a simple  for  loop to consider every word in  text . A list comprehension generates the context words, stored in the  skipgrams  list: 
skipgrams = []
for i in range(CONTEXT_SIZE, len(text) - CONTEXT_SIZE):
    array = [text[j] for j in np.arange(i - CONTEXT_SIZE, i + CONTEXT_SIZE + 1) if j != i]
    skipgrams.append((text[i], array)) 
 Finally, use the  print()  function to see the skip-grams  we generated: 
print(skipgrams[0:2]) 
 This produces  the  following output: 
[('dolor', ['Lorem', 'ipsum', 'sit', 'amet,']), ('sit', ['ipsum', 'dolor', 'amet,', 'consectetur'])] 
 
 These two target words, with  their corresponding context, work to show what the inputs to Word2Vec  look like. 
 The skip-gram model 
 The goal of Word2Vec is to produce  high-quality word embeddings. To learn these embeddings, the training task of the skip-gram model consists of predicting the correct context words given a  target word. 
 Imagine that we have a sequence of   words  . The probability of seeing the word   given the word   is written  . Our goal is to maximize the sum of every probability of seeing a context word given a target word in an  entire text: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Where   is the size  of the  context vector. 
 Note 
 Why do we use a log probability in the previous equation? Transforming probabilities into log probabilities is a common technique in ML (and computer science in general) for two  main reasons. 
 Products become additions (and divisions become subtractions). Multiplications are more computationally expensive than additions, so it’s faster to compute the  log probability: 
 
 
 
 
 
 The way computers store very small numbers (such as 3.14e-128) is not perfectly accurate, unlike the log of the same numbers (-127.5 in this case). These small errors can add up and bias the final results when events are  extremely unlikely. 
 On the whole, this simple transformation allows us to gain speed and accuracy without changing our  initial objective. 
 The basic skip-gram model  uses the softmax function to calculate the probability of a context word embedding   given a target word  embedding  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 Where   is the vocabulary of size  . This vocabulary corresponds to the list of unique words the model tries to predict. We can obtain this list using the  set  data structure to remove  duplicate words: 
 
vocab = set(text)
VOCAB_SIZE = len(vocab)
print(f"Length of vocabulary = {VOCAB_SIZE}") 
 This gives us the  following output: 
 
Length of vocabulary = 121 
 Now that we have the size of our vocabulary, there is one more parameter we need to define:  , the dimensionality of the word vectors. Typically, this value is set between 100 and 1,000. In this example, we will set it to 10 because of the limited size of  our dataset. 
 The skip-gram model is composed of only  two layers: 
 
 A  projection layer  with a weight matrix  , which takes a one-hot encoded-word vector as an input  and returns the corresponding  -dim word embedding. It acts as a simple lookup table that stores embeddings of a  predefined dimensionality. 
 A  fully connected layer  with a  weight matrix  , which takes a word embedding as input and outputs  -dim logits. A softmax  function is applied to these predictions to transform logits  into probabilities. 
 
 Note 
 There is no activation function: Word2Vec is a linear classifier that models a linear relationship  between words. 
 Let’s call   the one-hot encoded-word vector the  input . The corresponding word embedding can be calculated as a  simple projection: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Using the skip-gram model, we can rewrite the previous probability  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 The skip-gram  model outputs a  -dim vector, which is the conditional probability of every word in  the vocabulary: 
 
 
 
 
 
 During training, these probabilities are compared to the correct one-hot encoded-target word vectors. The difference between these values (calculated by a loss function such as the cross-entropy loss) is backpropagated through the network to update the weights and obtain  better predictions. 
 The entire Word2Vec architecture is summarized in the following diagram, with both matrices and the final  softmax layer: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3.3 – The Word2Vec architecture 
 We can implement this model using the  gensim  library, which is also used in the official implementation of DeepWalk. We can then build the vocabulary and train our model based on the   previous text: 
 
 Let’s begin by installing  gensim  and importing the  Word2Vec  class: 
!pip install -qU gensim
from gensim.models.word2vec import Word2Vec 
 We initialize a skip-gram model with a  Word2Vec  object and an  sg=1  parameter (skip-gram =  1): 
model = Word2Vec([text],
                 sg=1,   # Skip-gram
                 vector_size=10,
                 min_count=0,
                 window=2,
                 workers=2,
                 seed=0) 
 It’s a good idea to check the shape of our first weight matrix. It should correspond to the vocabulary size and the word  embeddings’ dimensionality: 
print(f'Shape of W_embed: {model.wv.vectors.shape}') 
 This produces the  following output: 
Shape of W_embed = (121, 10) 
 Next, we train the model for  10  epochs: 
model.train([text], total_examples=model.corpus_count, epochs=10) 
 Finally, we can print a word embedding to see what the result of this training  looks like: 
print('Word embedding =')
print(model.wv[0]) 
 This gives us  the  following output: 
Word embedding =
[ 0.06947816 -0.06254371 -0.08287395  0.07274164 -0.09449387  0.01215031  -0.08728203 -0.04045384 -0.00368091 -0.0141237 ] 
 
 While this approach works well with small vocabularies, the computational cost of applying a full softmax function to millions of words (the vocabulary size ) is too costly in most cases. This has been a limiting factor in developing accurate language models for a long time. Fortunately for us, other approaches have been designed to solve  this issue. 
 Word2Vec (and DeepWalk) implements one of  these techniques, called H-Softmax. Instead of a flat softmax that directly calculates the probability of every word, this technique uses a binary tree structure where leaves are words. Even more interestingly, a Huffman tree can be used, where infrequent words are stored at deeper levels than common words. In most cases, this dramatically speeds up the word prediction by a factor of at  least 50. 
 H-Softmax can be activated in  gensim   using  hs=1 . 
 This was the most difficult part of the DeepWalk architecture. But before we can implement it, we need one more component: how to create our  training data. 
 DeepWalk and random walks 
 Proposed in 2014 by Perozzi et al., DeepWalk quickly  became extremely popular among graph researchers. Inspired by recent advances in NLP, it consistently outperformed other methods on several datasets. While more performant architectures have been proposed since then, DeepWalk is a simple and reliable baseline that can be quickly implemented to solve a lot  of problems. 
 The goal of DeepWalk is  to produce high-quality feature representations of nodes in an unsupervised way. This architecture is heavily inspired by Word2Vec in NLP. However, instead of words, our dataset is composed of nodes. This is why we use random walks to generate meaningful sequences of nodes that act like sentences. The following diagram illustrates the connection between sentences  and graphs: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3.4 – Sentences can be represented as graphs 
 Random walks are sequences of nodes  produced by randomly choosing a neighboring node at every step. Thus, nodes can appear several times in the  same sequence. 
 Why are random walks important? Even if nodes are randomly selected, the fact that they often appear together in a sequence means that they are close to each other. Under the  network homophily  hypothesis, nodes  that are close to each other are similar. This is particularly the case in social networks, where people are connected to friends  and family. 
 This idea is at the core of the DeepWalk algorithm: when nodes are close to each other, we want to obtain high similarity scores. On the contrary, we want low scores when they are  farther apart. 
 Let’s implement a  random walk function using a  networkx  graph: 
 
 Let’s import the required libraries and initialize the random number generator  for reproducibility: 
import networkx as nx
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np
import random
random.seed(0) 
 We generate a random graph thanks to the  erdos_renyi_graph  function with a fixed number of nodes ( 10 ) and a predefined probability of creating an edge between two  nodes ( 0.3 ): 
G = nx.erdos_renyi_graph(10, 0.3, seed=1, directed=False) 
 We plot this random graph to see what it  looks like: 
plt.figure(dpi=300)
plt.axis('off')
nx.draw_networkx(G,
                 pos=nx.spring_layout(G, seed=0),
                 node_size=600,
                 cmap='coolwarm',
                 font_size=14,
                 font_color='white'
                 ) 
 
 This produces the  following graph: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3.5 – Random graph 
 
 Let’s implement  random walks with a simple function. This function takes two parameters: the starting node ( start ) and the length of the walk ( length ). At every step, we randomly select a neighboring node (using  np.random.choice ) until the walk  is complete: 
def random_walk(start, length):
    walk = [str(start)]  # starting node
    for i in range(length):
        neighbors = [node for node in G.neighbors(start)]
        next_node = np.random.choice(neighbors, 1)[0]
        walk.append(str(next_node))
        start = next_node
    return walk 
 Next, we print the result of this function with the starting node as  0  and a length  of  10 : 
print(random_walk(0, 10)) 
 This produces the  following list: 
['0', '4', '3', '6', '3', '4', '7', '8', '7', '4', '9'] 
 
 We can see that certain nodes, such as  0  and  9 , are often found together. Considering that it is a homophilic graph, it means that they are similar. It is precisely the type of relationship we’re  trying to capture  with DeepWalk. 
 Now that we have implemented Word2Vec and random walks separately, let’s combine them to  create DeepWalk. 
 Implementing DeepWalk 
 Now that we have a good understanding of every component in this architecture, let’s use it to solve an  ML problem. 
 The dataset we will use is  Zachary’s Karate Club. It simply represents the relationships within a karate club studied by Wayne W. Zachary in the 1970s. It is a kind of social network where every node is a member, and members who interact outside the club  are connected. 
 In this example, the club is divided into two groups: we would like to assign the right group to every member (node classification) just by looking at  their connections: 
 
 Let’s import the dataset  using  nx.karate_club_graph() : 
G = nx.karate_club_graph() 
 Next, we need to convert string class labels into numerical values (Mr. Hi =  0 ,  Officer  =  1 ): 
labels = []
for node in G.nodes:
    label = G.nodes[node]['club']
    labels.append(1 if label == 'Officer' else 0) 
 Let’s plot this graph using our  new labels: 
plt.figure(figsize=(12,12), dpi=300)
plt.axis('off')
nx.draw_networkx(G,
                 pos=nx.spring_layout(G, seed=0),
                 node_color=labels,
                 node_size=800,
                 cmap='coolwarm',
                 font_size=14,
                 font_color='white'
                 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3.6 – Zachary’s Karate Club 
 
 The next step is to generate our dataset, the random walks. We want to be as exhaustive  as possible, which is why we will create  80  random walks of a length of  10  for every node in  the graph: 
walks = []
for node in G.nodes:
    for _ in range(80):
        walks.append(random_walk(node, 10)) 
 Let’s print a walk to verify that it  is correct: 
print(walks[0]) 
 This is the first walk that  was generated: 
['0', '19', '1', '2', '0', '3', '2', '8', '33', '14', '33'] 
 The final step consists of implementing Word2Vec. Here, we use the skip-gram model previously seen with H-Softmax. You can play with the other parameters to improve the quality of  the embeddings: 
model = Word2Vec(walks,
                 hs=1,   # Hierarchical softmax
                 sg=1,   # Skip-gram
                 vector_size=100,
                 window=10,
                 workers=2,
                 seed=0) 
 The model is  then simply trained on the random walks  we generated. 
model.train(walks, total_examples=model.corpus_count, epochs=30, report_delay=1) 
 Now that our model is trained, let’s see its different applications. The first one allows us to find the most similar nodes to a given one (in terms of  cosine similarity): 
print('Nodes that are the most similar to node 0:')
for similarity in model.wv.most_similar(positive=['0']):
    print(f'   {similarity}') 
 
 This produces the following output for  Nodes that are the most similar to  node 0 : 
 
   ('4', 0.6825815439224243)
   ('11', 0.6330500245094299)
   ('5', 0.6324777603149414)
   ('10', 0.6097837090492249)
   ('6', 0.6096848249435425)
   ('21', 0.5936519503593445)
   ('12', 0.5906376242637634)
   ('3', 0.5797219276428223)
   ('16', 0.5388344526290894)
   ('13', 0.534131646156311) 
 Another important application is calculating the similarity score between two nodes. It can be performed  as follows: 
 
# Similarity between two nodes
print(f"Similarity between node 0 and 4: {model.wv.similarity('0', '4')}") 
 This code directly gives us the cosine similarity between  two nodes: 
 
Similarity between node 0 and 4: 0.6825816631317139 
 We can plot the resulting  embeddings using  t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding  ( t-SNE ) to visualize  these high-dimensional vectors  in 2D: 
 
 We import the  TSNE  class  from  sklearn : 
from sklearn.manifold import TSNE 
 We create two arrays: one to store the word embeddings and the other one to store  the labels: 
nodes_wv = np.array([model.wv.get_vector(str(i)) for i in range(len(model.wv))])
labels = np.array(labels) 
 Next, we train the t-SNE model with two dimensions ( n_components=2 ) on  the embeddings: 
tsne = TSNE(n_components=2,
            learning_rate='auto',
            init='pca',
            random_state=0).fit_transform(nodes_wv) 
 Finally, let’s plot the  2D vectors produced by the trained t-SNE model with the  corresponding labels: 
plt.figure(figsize=(6, 6), dpi=300)
plt.scatter(tsne[:, 0], tsne[:, 1], s=100, c=labels, cmap="coolwarm")
plt.show() 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3.7 – A t-SNE plot of the nodes 
 This plot is quite encouraging since we can see a clear line that separates the two classes. It should be  possible for a simple ML algorithm to classify these nodes with enough examples (training data). Let’s implement a classifier and train it on our  node embeddings: 
 
 We import a Random Forest model from  sklearn , which is a popular choice when it comes to classification. The accuracy score is the metric we’ll use to evaluate  this model: 
from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score 
 We need to split the embeddings into two groups: training and test data. A simple way of doing it is to create masks  as follows: 
train_mask = [0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28]
test_mask = [1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33] 
 Next, we train  the Random Forest classifier on the training data with the  appropriate labels: 
clf = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=0)
clf.fit(nodes_wv[train_mask], labels[train_mask]) 
 Finally, we evaluate the trained model on the test data based on its  accuracy score: 
y_pred = clf.predict(nodes_wv[test_mask])
accuracy_score(y_pred, labels[test_mask]) 
 This is the final result of  our classifier: 
0.9545454545454546 
 
 Our model obtains an accuracy score of 95.45%, which is pretty good considering the unfavorable train/test split we gave it. There is still room for improvement, but this example showed two  useful applications  of DeepWalk: 
 
 Discovering similarities between nodes  using embeddings and cosine similarity ( unsupervised learning) 
 Using these embeddings as a dataset  for a supervised task such as  node classification 
 
 As we are going to see in the following chapters, the ability to learn node representations offers a lot of flexibility to design deeper and more  complex architectures. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we learned about DeepWalk architecture and its major components. Then, we transformed graph data into sequences using random walks to apply the powerful Word2Vec algorithm. The resulting embeddings can be used to find similarities between nodes or as input to other algorithms. In particular, we solved a node classification problem using a  supervised approach. 
 In  Chapter 4 ,  Improving Embeddings with Biased Random Walks in Node2Vec , we will introduce a second algorithm based on Word2Vec. The difference with DeepWalk is that the random walks can be biased towards more or less exploration, which directly impacts the embeddings that are produced. We will implement this algorithm on a new example and compare its representations with those obtained  using DeepWalk. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena,  DeepWalk , Aug. 2014. DOI: 10.1145/2623330.2623732. Available  at  https://arxiv.org/abs/1403.6652 . 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 Part 2: Fundamentals 
 In this second part of the book, we will delve into the process of constructing node representations using graph learning. We will start by exploring traditional graph learning techniques, drawing on the advancements made in natural language processing. Our aim is to understand how these techniques can be applied to graphs and how they can be used to build  node representations. 
 We will then move on to incorporating node features into our models and explore how they can be used to build even more accurate representations. Finally, we will introduce two of the most fundamental GNN architectures, the  Graph Convolutional Network  ( GCN ) and the  Graph Attention Network  ( GAT ). These two architectures are the building blocks of many state-of-the-art graph learning methods and will provide a solid foundation for the  next part. 
 By the end of this part, you will have a deeper understanding of how traditional graph learning techniques, such as random walks, can be used to create node representations and develop graph applications. Additionally, you will learn how to build even more powerful representations using GNNs. You will be introduced to two key GNN architectures and learn how they can be used to tackle various  graph-based tasks. 
 This part comprises the  following chapters: 
 
 Chapter 3 , Creating Node Representations with DeepWalk 
 Chapter 4 , Improving Embeddings with Biased Random Walks in Node2Vec 
 Chapter 5 , Including Node Features with Vanilla Neural Networks 
 Chapter 6 , Introducing Graph Convolutional Networks 
 Chapter 7 , Graph Attention Networks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 4 
 Improving Embeddings with Biased Random Walks in Node2Vec 
 Node2Vec  is  an architecture largely based on DeepWalk. In the previous chapter, we saw the two main components of this architecture: random walks and Word2Vec. How can we improve the quality of our embeddings? Interestingly enough, not with more machine learning. Instead, Node2Vec brings critical modifications to the way random walks themselves  are generated. 
 In this chapter, we will talk about these modifications and how to find the best parameters for a given graph. We will implement the Node2Vec architecture and compare it to using DeepWalk on Zachary’s Karate Club. This will give you a good understanding of the differences between the two architectures. Finally, we will use this technology to build a real application: a movie  recommender system  ( RecSys ) powered  by Node2Vec. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will know how to implement Node2Vec on any graph dataset and how to select good parameters. You will understand why this architecture works better than DeepWalk in general, and how to apply it to build  creative applications. 
 In this chapter, we’ll cover the  following topics: 
 
 Introducing Node2Vec 
 Implementing Node2Vec 
 Building a  movie RecSys 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter04 . 
 Installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  of  this book. 
 Introducing Node2Vec 
 Node2Vec was  introduced in 2016 by Grover and Leskovec from Stanford University [1]. It keeps the same two main components from DeepWalk: random walks and Word2Vec. The difference is that instead of obtaining sequences of nodes with a uniform distribution, the random walks are carefully biased in Node2Vec. We will see why these  biased random walks  perform better and how to implement them in the two  following sections: 
 
 Defining  a  neighborhood 
 Introducing biases in  random walks 
 
 Let’s start by questioning our intuitive concept  of neighborhoods. 
 Defining a neighborhood 
 How do you define the neighborhood  of a node? The key concept introduced in Node2Vec is the flexible notion of a neighborhood. Intuitively, we think of it as something close to the initial node, but what does “close” mean in the context of a graph? Let’s take the following graph as  an example: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4.1 – Example of a random graph 
 We want to explore three nodes in the neighborhood of node  A . This exploration  process is also called a  sampling strategy : 
 
 A possible  solution would be to consider the three closest nodes in terms of connections. In this case, the neighborhood of  , noted  , would  be  : 
 Another possible sampling strategy consists of selecting nodes that are not adjacent to previous nodes first. In our example, the neighborhood of   would  be  : 
 
 In other words, we want  to implement a  Breadth-First Search  ( BFS ) in the first case and a  Depth-First Search  ( DFS ) in the second  one. You can find more information about these algorithms and implementations in  Chapter 2 , Graph Theory for Graph  Neural Networks. 
 What is important to notice here is that these sampling strategies have opposite behaviors: BFS focuses on the local network around a node while DFS establishes a more macro view of the graph. Considering our intuitive definition of a neighborhood, it is tempting to simply discard DFS. However, Node2Vec’s authors argue that this would be a mistake: each approach captures a different but valuable representation of  the network. 
 They make a connection between these algorithms and two  network properties: 
 
 Structural equivalence , which means that nodes  are structurally equivalent if they share many of the same neighbors. So, if they share many neighbors, their structural equivalence  is higher. 
 Homophily , as seen previously, states that similar nodes  are more likely to  be connected. 
 
 They argue that BFS is ideal to emphasize structural equivalence since this strategy only looks at neighboring nodes. In these random walks, nodes are often repeated and stay close to each other. DFS, on the other hand, emphasizes the opposite of homophily by creating sequences of distant nodes. These random walks can sample nodes that are far from the source and thus become less representative. This is why we’re looking for a trade-off between these two properties: homophily may be more helpful for understanding certain graphs  and  vice versa. 
 If you’re confused about this connection, you’re not alone: several papers and blogs wrongly assume that BFS emphasizes homophily and DFS is connected to structural equivalence. In any case, we consider graphs that combine homophily and structural equivalence to be the desired solution. This is why, regardless of these connections, we want to use both sampling strategies to create  our dataset. 
 Let’s see how we can implement them to generate  random walks. 
 Introducing biases in random walks 
 As a reminder, random walks are sequences  of nodes that are randomly selected in a graph. They have a starting point, which can also be random, and a predefined length. Nodes that often appear together in these walks are like words that appear together in sentences: under the homophily hypothesis, they share a similar meaning, hence a  similar representation. 
 In Node2Vec, our goal is to bias the randomness of these walks to either one of  the following: 
 
 Promoting nodes that are not connected to the previous one (similar  to DFS) 
 Promoting nodes that are close to the previous  one (similar  to BFS) 
 
 Let’s take  Figure 4 .2  as an example. The current  node is called  , the previous node is  , and the future node is  . We note  , the unnormalized transition probability from node   to node  . This probability can be decomposed as   , where   is the  search bias  between nodes   and  and   is the weight of the edge from    to  . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4.2 – Example of a random graph 
 In DeepWalk, we have   for any pair of nodes   and  . In Node2Vec, the value of   is defined based on the distance  between the nodes and two additional parameters:  , the return parameter, and  , the in-out parameter. Their role is to approximate DFS and  BFS, respectively. 
 Here is how the value of    is defined: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   is the shortest path distance between nodes   and  . We can update the unnormalized transition probability from the previous graph  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4.3 – Graph with transition probabilities 
 Let’s decrypt  these probabilities: 
 
 The walk starts from  node   and now arrives  at node  . The probability of going back to the previous node   is controlled by the parameter  . The higher it is, the more the random walk will explore new nodes instead of repeating the same ones and looking  like DFS. 
 The unnormalized probability of going to   is   because this node is in the immediate neighborhood of our previous  node,  . 
 Finally, the probability of going to node   is controlled by the parameter  . The higher it is, the more the random walk will focus on nodes that are close to the previous one and look  like BFS. 
 
 The best way to understand this is to actually implement this architecture and play with the parameters. Let’s do it step by step on Zachary’s Karate Club (a graph from the previous chapter), as shown in  Figure 4 .4 : 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4.4 – Zachary’s Karate Club 
 Note that it is an unweighted  network, which is why the transition probability is only determined by the  search bias. 
 First, we want to create a function that will randomly select the next node in a graph based on the previous node, the current node, and the two parameters    and  . 
 
 We start by importing the required libraries:  networkx ,  random ,  and  numpy : 
import networkx as nx
import random
random.seed(0)
import numpy as np
np.random.seed(0)
G = nx.erdos_renyi_graph(10, 0.3, seed=1, directed=False) 
 We defined the  next_node  function with the list of  our parameters: 
def next_node(previous, current, p, q): 
 We retrieve the list of neighboring nodes from the current node and initialize a list of  alpha values: 
        neighbors = list(G.neighbors(current))
        alphas = [] 
 For each neighbor, we want to calculate the appropriate alpha value:   if this neighbor is the previous node,   if this neighbor is connected to the previous node, and    otherwise: 
    for neighbor in neighbors:
        if neighbor == previous:
            alpha = 1/p
        elif G.has_edge(neighbor, previous):
            alpha = 1
        else:
            alpha = 1/q
        alphas.append(alpha) 
 We normalize these values to  create probabilities: 
probs = [alpha / sum(alphas) for alpha in alphas] 
 We randomly select the next node based on the transition probabilities calculated in the previous step using  np.random.choice()  and  return it: 
    next = np.random.choice(neighbors, size=1, p=probs)[0]
    return next 
 
 Before this function can be tested, we need the code to generate the entire  random walk. 
 The way we generate these random  walks is similar to what we saw in the previous chapter. The difference is that the next node is chosen by the  next_node()  function, which requires additional parameters:   and  , but also the previous and current nodes. These nodes can easily be obtained by looking at the two last elements added to the  walk  variable. We also return strings instead of integers for  compatibility reasons. 
 Here is the new version of the  random_walk()  function: 
 
def random_walk(start, length, p, q):
    walk = [start]
    for i in range(length):
        current = walk[-1]
        previous = walk[-2] if len(walk) > 1 else None
        next = next_node(previous, current, p, q)
        walk.append(next)
    return [str(x) for x in walk] 
 We now have every element to generate our random walks. Let’s try one with a length of 5,  ,  and  : 
 
random_walk(0, 8, p=1, q=1) 
 This function returns the  following sequence: 
 
[0, 4, 7, 6, 4, 5, 4, 5, 6] 
 This should be random since every neighboring node has the same transition probability. With these parameters, we reproduce the exact  DeepWalk algorithm. 
 Now, let’s bias them toward going back to the previous node  with  : 
 
random_walk(0, 8, p=1, q=10) 
 This function returns the  following sequence: 
 
[0, 9, 1, 9, 1, 9, 1, 0, 1] 
 This time, the random walk explores more nodes in the graph. You can see that it never goes back to the previous node because the probability is low  with  : 
 
random_walk(0, 8, p=10, q=1) 
 This function  returns the  following sequence: 
 
 [0, 1, 9, 4, 7, 8, 7, 4, 6] 
 Let’s see how to use these properties in a real example and compare it  to DeepWalk. 
 Implementing Node2Vec 
 Now that we have the functions  to generate biased random walks, the implementation of Node2Vec is very similar to implementing DeepWalk. It is so similar that we can reuse the same code and create sequences with   and   to implement DeepWalk as a special case of Node2Vec. Let’s reuse Zachary’s Karate Club for  this task: 
 As in the previous chapter, our goal is to correctly classify each member of the club as part of one of the two groups (“Mr. Hi” and “Officer”). We will use the node embeddings provided by Node2Vec as input to a machine learning classifier (Random Forest in  this case). 
 Let’s see how to implement it step  by step: 
 
 First, we want to install the  gensim  library to use Word2Vec. This time, we will use version 3.8.0 for  compatibility reasons: 
!pip install -qI gensim==3.8.0 
 We import the  required libraries: 
from gensim.models.word2vec import Word2Vec
from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score 
 We load the dataset (Zachary’s  Karate Club): 
G = nx.karate_club_graph() 
 We transform the nodes’ labels into numerical values ( 0   and  1 ): 
labels = []
for node in G.nodes:
    label = G.nodes[node]['club']
    labels.append(1 if label == 'Officer' else 0) 
 We generate a list of random walks as seen previously using our  random_walk()  function 80 times for each node in the graph. The parameters   and   as specified here (2 and  1, respectively): 
walks = []
for node in G.nodes:
    for _ in range(80):
        walks.append(random_walk(node, 10, 3, 2)) 
 We create an instance  of Word2Vec (a skip-gram model) with a hierarchical  softmax  function: 
node2vec = Word2Vec(walks,
                hs=1,   # Hierarchical softmax
                sg=1,   # Skip-gram
                vector_size=100,
                window=10,
                workers=2,
                min_count=1,
                seed=0) 
 The skip-gram model is trained on the sequences we generated for  30  epochs: 
node2vec.train(walks, total_examples=node2vec.corpus_count, epochs=30, report_delay=1) 
 We create masks to train and test  the classifier: 
train_mask = [2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24]
train_mask_str = [str(x) for x in train_mask]
test_mask = [0, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33]
test_mask_str = [str(x) for x in test_mask]
labels = np.array(labels) 
 The Random Forest classifier is trained on the  training data: 
clf = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=0)
clf.fit(node2vec.wv[train_mask_str], labels[train_mask]) 
 We evaluate it in terms of accuracy for the  test data: 
y_pred = clf.predict(node2vec.wv[test_mask_str])
acc = accuracy_score(y_pred, labels[test_mask])
print(f'Node2Vec accuracy = {acc*100:.2f}%') 
 
 To implement DeepWalk, we can repeat the exact same process with   and  . However, to make a fair comparison, we cannot use a single accuracy score. Indeed, there are a lot of stochastic processes involved – we could be unlucky and get a better result from the  worst model. 
 To limit the randomness  of our results, we can repeat this process 100 times and take the mean value. This result is a lot more stable and can even include the standard deviation (using  np.std() ) to measure the variability in the  accuracy scores. 
 But just before we do that, let’s play a game. In the previous chapter, we talked about Zachary’s Karate Club as a homophilic network. This property is emphasized by DFS, which is encouraged by increasing the parameter  . If this statement and the connection between DFS and homophily are true, we should get better results with higher values  of  . 
 I repeated the same experiment for values of   and   between 1 and 7. In a real machine learning project, we would use validation data to perform this parameter search. In this example, we use the test data because this study is already our  final application. 
 The following table summarizes  the results: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4.5 – Average accuracy score and standard deviation for different values of p and q 
 There are several  noticeable results: 
 
 DeepWalk (  and  ) performs worse than any other combination of   and   that is covered here. This is true for this dataset and shows how useful biased random walks can be. However, it is not always the case: non-biased random walks can also perform better on  other datasets. 
 High values of   lead to better performance, which validates our hypothesis. Knowing that this is a social network strongly suggests that biasing our random walks toward homophily is a good strategy. This is something to keep in mind when dealing with this kind  of graph. 
 
 Feel free to play with the parameters and try to find  other interesting results. We could explore results with very high values of   ( ) or, on the contrary, values of   and   between 0  and 1. 
 Zachary’s Karate Club is a basic dataset, but we’ll see in the next section how we can use this technology to build much more  interesting applications. 
 Building a movie RecSys 
 One of the most popular  applications of GNNs is RecSys. If you think about the foundation of Word2Vec (and, thus, DeepWalk and Node2Vec), the goal is to produce vectors with the ability to measure their similarity. Encode movies instead of words, and you can suddenly ask for movies that are the most similar to a given input title. It sounds a lot like a  RecSys, right? 
 But how to encode movies? We want to create (biased) random walks of movies, but this requires a graph dataset where similar movies are connected to each other. This is not easy  to find. 
 Another approach is to look at user ratings. There are different techniques to build a graph based on ratings: bipartite graphs, edges based on pointwise mutual information, and so on. In this section, we’ll implement a simple and intuitive approach: movies that are liked by the same users are connected. We’ll then use this graph to learn movie embeddings  using Node2Vec: 
 
 First, let’s download a dataset.  MovieLens  [2] is a popular choice, with a small version of the latest dataset (09/2018) comprising 100,836 ratings, 9,742 movies, and 610 users. We can download it with the following  Python code: 
from io import BytesIO
from urllib.request import urlopen
from zipfile import ZipFile
url = 'https://files.grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/ml-100k.zip'
with urlopen(url) as zurl:
    with ZipFile(BytesIO(zurl.read())) as zfile:
        zfile.extractall('.') 
 We are interested in two files:  ratings.csv  and  movies.csv . The first one stores all the ratings made by users, and the second one allows us to translate movie identifiers  into titles. 
 Let’s see what they look like by importing them with  pandas   using  pd.read_csv() : 
import pandas as pd
ratings = pd.read_csv('ml-100k/u.data', sep='\t', names=['user_id', 'movie_id', 'rating', 'unix_timestamp'])
ratings 
 This gives us the  following output: 
      user_id movie_id rating unix_timestamp 
 0     196      242      3      881250949 
 1     186      302      3      891717742 
 2      22      377      1      878887116 
 ...    ...     ...     ...      ... 
 99998  13      225      2      882399156 
 99999  12      203      3      879959583 
 100000 rows × 4 columns 
 Let’s import  movies.csv  now: 
movies = pd.read_csv('ml-100k/u.item', sep='|', usecols=range(2), names=['movie_id', 'title'], encoding='latin-1') 
 This dataset gives  us  this output: 
movies
      movie_id      title 
 0      1      Toy Story (1995) 
 1      2      GoldenEye (1995) 
 2      3      Four Rooms (1995) 
 ...      ...      ... 
 1680      1681      You So Crazy (1994) 
 1681      1682      Scream of Stone (Schrei aus Stein) (1991) 
 1682 rows × 2 columns 
 Here, we want to see movies that have been liked by the same users. This means that ratings such as 1, 2, and 3 are not very relevant. We can discard those and only keep scores of 4  and 5: 
ratings = ratings[ratings.rating >= 4]
ratings 
 This gives  us the  following output: 
      user_id   movie_id    rating      unix_timestamp 
 5      298      474      4      884182806 
 7      253      465      5      891628467 
 11     286      1014     5      879781125 
 ...      ...      ...      ...      ... 
 99991      676      538      4      892685437 
 99996      716      204      5      879795543 
 55375 rows × 4 columns 
 We now have 48,580 ratings made by 610 users. The next step is to count every time that two movies are liked by the same user. We will repeat this process for every user in  the dataset. 
 To simplify things, we will use a  defaultdict  data structure, which automatically creates missing entries instead of raising an error. We’ll use this structure to count movies that are  liked together: 
from collections import defaultdict
pairs = defaultdict(int) 
 We loop through the entire list of users in  our dataset: 
for group in ratings.groupby("userId"): 
 We retrieve the list of movies that have been liked by the  current user: 
user_movies = list(group[1]["movieId"]) 
 We increment a counter specific to a pair of movies every time they are seen together in the  same list: 
for i in range(len(user_movies)):
            for j in range(i+1, len(user_movies)):
                pairs[(user_movies[i], user_movies[j])] += 1 
 The  pairs  object now stores the number of times two movies have been liked by the same user. We can use this information to build the edges of our graph  as follows. 
 We create a graph using the  networkx  library: 
G = nx.Graph() 
 For each pair of movies in our  pairs  structure, we unpack the two movies and their  corresponding score: 
for pair in pairs:
    movie1, movie2 = pair
    score = pairs[pair] 
 If this score is higher than 10, we add a weighted link to the graph to connect both movies based on this score. We don’t consider scores lower than 10 because that would create a large graph in which connections were  less meaningful: 
if score >= 20:
    G.add_edge(movie1, movie2, weight=score) 
 The graph we created  has 410 nodes (movies) and 14,936 edges. We can now train Node2Vec on it to learn the  node embeddings! 
 
 We could reuse our implementation from the previous section, but there is actually an entire Python library dedicated to Node2Vec (also called  node2vec ). Let’s try it in  this example: 
 
 We install the  node2vec  library and import the  Node2Vec  class: 
!pip install node2vec
from node2vec import Node2Vec 
 We create an instance of  Node2Vec  that will automatically generate biased random walks based on   and    parameters: 
node2vec = Node2Vec(G, dimensions=64, walk_length=20, num_walks=200, p=2, q=1, workers=1) 
 We train a model on these biased random walks with a window of 10 (5 nodes before, 5  nodes after): 
model = node2vec.fit(window=10, min_count=1, 
batch_words=4) 
 
 The Node2Vec model is trained and we can now use it the same way we use the Word2Vec object from the  gensim  library. Let’s create a function to recommend movies based on a  given title: 
 
 We create the  recommend()  function, which takes a movie title as input. It starts by converting the title into a movie ID we can use to query  our model: 
def recommend(movie):
    movie_id = str
        movies.title == movie].movie_ id.values[0]) 
 We loop through the five most similar word vectors. We convert these IDs into movie titles that we print with their corresponding  similarity scores: 
    for id in model.wv.most_similar(movie_id)[:5]:
        title = movies[movies.movie_id == int(id[0])].title.values[0]
        print(f'{title}: {id[1]:.2f}') 
 We call this function to obtain the five movies that are the most similar to Star Wars in terms of  cosine similarity: 
recommend('Star Wars (1977)') 
 We receive  the  following output: 
Return of the Jedi (1983): 0.61
Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981): 0.55
Godfather, The (1972): 0.49
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (1989): 0.46
White Squall (1996): 0.44 
 
 The model tells us that  Return of the Jedi  and  Raiders of the Lost Ark  are the most similar to  Star Wars , although with a relatively low score (< 0.7). Nonetheless, this is a good result for our first step into the RecSys world! In later chapters, we’ll see more powerful models and approaches to building  state-of-the-art RecSys. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we learned about Node2Vec, a second architecture based on the popular Word2Vec. We implemented functions to generate biased random walks and explained the connection between their parameters and two network properties: homophily and structural equivalence. We showed their usefulness by comparing Node2Vec’s results to DeepWalk’s for Zachary’s Karate Club. Finally, we built our first RecSys using a custom graph dataset and another implementation of Node2Vec. It gave us correct recommendations that we will improve even more in  later chapters. 
 In  Chapter 5 , Including Node Features with Vanilla Neural Networks , we will talk about one overlooked issue concerning DeepWalk and Node2Vec: the lack of proper node features. We will try to address this problem using traditional neural networks, which cannot understand the network topology. This dilemma is important to understand before we finally introduce the answer: graph  neural networks. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] A. Grover and J. Leskovec,  node2vec: Scalable Feature Learning for Networks . arXiv, 2016. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1607.00653.  Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.00653 . 
 [2] F. Maxwell Harper and Joseph A. Konstan. 2015.  The MovieLens Datasets: History and Context. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS)  5, 4: 19:1–19:19.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2827872 .  Available:  https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2827872 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 5 
 Including Node Features with Vanilla Neural Networks 
 So far, the only type of information we’ve considered is the graph topology. However, graph datasets tend to be richer than a mere set of connections: nodes and edges can also have features to represent scores, colors, words, and so on. Including this additional information in our input data is essential to produce the best embeddings possible. In fact, this is something natural in machine learning: node and edge features have the same structure as a tabular (non-graph) dataset. This means that traditional techniques can be applied to this data, such as  neural networks. 
 In this chapter, we will introduce two new graph datasets:  Cora  and  Facebook Page-Page . We will see how  Vanilla Neural Networks  perform on node features only by considering them as tabular datasets. We will then experiment to include topological information in our neural networks. This will give us our first GNN architecture: a simple model that considers both node features and edges. Finally, we’ll compare the performance of the two architectures and obtain one of the most important results of  this book. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will master the implementation of vanilla neural networks and vanilla GNNs in PyTorch. You will be able to embed topological features into the node representations, which is the basis of every GNN architecture. This will allow you to greatly improve the performance of your models by transforming tabular datasets into  graph problems. 
 In this chapter, we’ll cover the  following topics: 
 
 Introducing  graph datasets 
 Classifying nodes with vanilla  neural networks 
 Classifying nodes with vanilla graph  neural networks 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter05 . 
 Installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  of  this book. 
 Introducing graph datasets 
 The  graph datasets we’re going to use in this chapter are richer than Zachary’s Karate Club: they have more nodes, more edges, and include node features. In this section, we will introduce them to give us a good understanding of these graphs and how to process them with PyTorch Geometric. Here are the two datasets we  will use: 
 
 The  Cora  dataset 
 The  Facebook  Page-Page  dataset 
 
 Let’s start with the smaller one: the popular  Cora  dataset. 
 The Cora dataset 
 Introduced  by Sen et al. in 2008 [1],  Cora  (no license) is the most popular dataset for node classification in the scientific literature. It represents a network of 2,708 publications, where each connection is a reference. Each publication  is described as a binary vector of 1,433 unique words, where  0  and  1  indicate the absence or presence of the corresponding word, respectively. This representation is also called a  binary  bag of words  in natural language processing. Our goal is to classify each node into one of  seven categories. 
 Regardless of the type of data, visualization is always an important step to getting a good grasp of the problem we face. However, graphs can quickly become too big to visualize using Python libraries such as  networkx . This is why dedicated tools have been developed specifically for graph data visualization. In this book, we utilize two of the most  popular  ones:  yEd Live  ( https://www.yworks.com/yed-live/ ) and  Gephi  ( https://gephi.org/ ). 
 The  following figure is a plot of the  Cora  dataset made with yEd Live. You  can see nodes corresponding to papers in orange and connections between them in green. Some papers are so interconnected that they form clusters. These clusters should be easier to classify than poorly  connected nodes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5.1 – The Cora dataset visualized with yEd Live 
 Let’s import it and analyze its main characteristics with PyTorch Geometric. This library has a dedicated class to download the dataset and return a relevant data structure. We assume  here that PyTorch Geometric has already  been installed: 
 
 We import the  Planetoid  class from  PyTorch Geometric: 
from torch_geometric.datasets import Planetoid 
 We download it using  this class: 
dataset = Planetoid(root=".", name="Cora") 
 Cora  only has one graph we can store in a dedicated  data  variable: 
data = dataset[0] 
 Let’s  print information about the dataset  in general: 
print(f'Dataset: {dataset}')
print('---------------')
print(f'Number of graphs: {len(dataset)}')
print(f'Number of nodes: {data.x.shape[0]}')
print(f'Number of features: {dataset.num_features}')
print(f'Number of classes: {dataset.num_classes}') 
 This gives us the  following output: 
 Dataset: Cora() 
 --------------- 
 Number of graphs: 1 
 Number of nodes: 2708 
 Number of features: 1433 
 Number of classes: 7 
 We can also get detailed information thanks to dedicated functions from  PyTorch Geometric: 
print(f'Graph:')
print('------')
print(f'Edges are directed: {data.is_directed()}')
print(f'Graph has isolated nodes: {data.has_isolated_nodes()}')
print(f'Graph has loops: {data.has_self_loops()}') 
 This is the result of the  previous block: 
 Graph: 
 ------ 
 Edges are directed: False 
 Graph has isolated nodes: False 
 Graph has loops: False 
 
 The first  output confirms the information about the number of  nodes, features, and classes. The second one gives more insights into the graph itself: edges are undirected, every node has neighbors, and the graph doesn’t have any self-loop. We could test other properties using PyTorch Geometric’s utils functions, but we wouldn’t learn anything new in  this example. 
 Now that we know more about  Cora , let’s see one that is more representative of the size of real-world social networks: the  Facebook  Page-Page  dataset. 
 The Facebook Page-Page dataset 
 This  dataset was introduced by Rozemberczki et al. in 2019 [2]. It was created using the Facebook Graph API in November 2017. In  this dataset, each of the 22,470 nodes represents an official Facebook page. Pages are connected when there are mutual likes between them. Node features (128-dim vectors) are created from textual descriptions written by the owners of these pages. Our goal is to classify each node into one of four categories: politicians, companies, television shows, and  governmental organizations. 
 The  Facebook Page-Page  dataset is similar to the previous one: it’s a social network with a node classification task. However, there are  three major differences  with  Cora : 
 
 The number of nodes is much higher (2,708  versus 22,470) 
 The dimensionality of the node features decreased dramatically (from 1,433  to 128) 
 The goal is to classify each node into four categories instead of seven (which is easier since there are  fewer options) 
 
 The following  figure is a visualization of the dataset using Gephi. First, nodes with few connections have been filtered out to improve performance. The size of the remaining nodes depends on their number of connections, and their color indicates the category they belong to. Finally, two layouts have been applied: Fruchterman-Reingold  and ForceAtlas2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5.2 – The Facebook Page-Page dataset visualized with Gephi 
 We can  import the  Facebook Page-Page  dataset  the same way we did it  for  Cora : 
 
 We import the  FacebookPagePage  class from  PyTorch Geometric: 
from torch_geometric.datasets import FacebookPagePage 
 We download it using  this class: 
dataset = FacebookPagePage(root=".") 
 We store the  graph in a dedicated  data  variable: 
data = dataset[0] 
 Let’s  print information about the dataset  in general: 
print(f'Dataset: {dataset}')
print('-----------------------')
print(f'Number of graphs: {len(dataset)}')
print(f'Number of nodes: {data.x.shape[0]}')
print(f'Number of features: {dataset.num_features}')
print(f'Number of classes: {dataset.num_classes}') 
 This gives us the  following output: 
 Dataset: FacebookPagePage() 
 ----------------------- 
 Number of graphs: 1 
 Number of nodes: 22470 
 Number of features: 128 
 Number of classes: 4 
 The same dedicated functions can be  applied here: 
print(f'\nGraph:')
print('------')
print(f'Edges are directed: {data.is_directed()}')
print(f'Graph has isolated nodes: {data.has_isolated_nodes()}')
print(f'Graph has loops: {data.has_self_loops()}') 
 
 This is the result of the  previous block: 
 
 Graph: 
 ------ 
 Edges are directed: False 
 Graph has isolated nodes: False 
 Graph has loops: True 
 
 Unlike   Cora ,  Facebook Page-Page   doesn’t have training, evaluation, and test masks by default. We can arbitrarily create masks with the  range()  function: 
data.train_mask = range(18000)
data.val_mask = range(18001, 20000)
data.test_mask = range(20001, 22470) 
 
 Alternatively, PyTorch Geometric offers a transform function to calculate random masks when the dataset  is loaded: 
 
import torch_geometric.transforms as T
dataset = Planetoid(root=".", name="Cora")
data = dataset[0] 
 The first output confirms the number of nodes and classes we saw in the description of the dataset. The second output tells us that this graph has  self  loops: some pages are connected to themselves. This is surprising but, in practice, it will not matter, as we’re going to  see soon. 
 These are the two graph datasets we will use in the next section, to compare the performance of a Vanilla Neural Network to the performance of our first GNN. Let’s implement them step  by step. 
 Classifying nodes with vanilla neural networks 
 Compared to  Zachary’s Karate Club, these two datasets include a new type of information: node features. They provide additional  information about the nodes in a graph, such as a user’s age, gender, or interests in a social network. In a vanilla neural network (also called  multilayer perceptron ), these  embeddings are directly used in the model to perform downstream tasks such as  node classification. 
 In this section, we will consider node features as a regular tabular dataset. We will train a simple neural network on this dataset to classify our nodes. Note that this architecture does not take into account the topology of the network. We will try to fix this issue in the next section and compare  our results. 
 The tabular dataset of node features can be easily accessed through the  data  object we created. First, I would like to convert this object into a regular pandas DataFrame by merging  data.x  (containing the node features) and  data.y  (containing the class label of each node among seven classes). In the following, we will use the  Cora  dataset: 
 
import pandas as pd
df_x = pd.DataFrame(data.x.numpy())
df_x['label'] = pd.DataFrame(data.y) 
 This gives us the  following dataset: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 1432 
 
 
 label 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 
 
 2707 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5.3 – Tabular representation of the Cora dataset (without topological information) 
 If you’re familiar with machine learning, you probably recognize a typical dataset with data and labels. We can develop a  simple  Multilayer Perceptron  ( MLP ) and train it on  data.x  with the labels provided  by  data.y . 
 Let’s create our own MLP class with  four methods: 
 
 __init__()  to initialize  an instance 
 forward()  to perform the  forward pass 
 fit()  to train  the model 
 test()  to  evaluate it 
 
 Before we  can train our model, we must define  the main metric. There are several metrics for multiclass classification problems: accuracy, F1 score,  Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve  ( ROC AUC ) score, and so on. For this  work, let’s implement a simple accuracy, which is defined as the fraction of correct predictions. It is not the best metric for multiclass classification, but it is simpler to understand. Feel free to replace it with your metric  of choice: 
 
def accuracy(y_pred, y_true):
    return torch.sum(y_pred == y_true) / len(y_true) 
 Now, we can start the actual implementation. We don’t need PyTorch Geometric to implement the MLP in this section. Everything can be done in regular PyTorch with the  following steps: 
 
 We import the required classes  from PyTorch: 
import torch
from torch.nn import Linear
import torch.nn.functional as F 
 We create a new class called  MLP , which will inherit all the methods and properties  from  torch.nn.Module : 
class MLP(torch.nn.Module): 
 The  __init__()  method has three arguments ( dim_in ,  dim_h , and  dim_out ) for the number of neurons in the input, hidden, and output layers, respectively. We also define two  linear layers: 
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_h, dim_out):
        super().__init__()
        self.linear1 = Linear(dim_in, dim_h)
        self.linear2 = Linear(dim_h, dim_out) 
 The  forward()  method performs the forward pass. The input is fed to the first linear  layer with a  Rectified Linear Unit  ( ReLU ) activation  function, and the result is passed to the second linear layer. We  return the log softmax of this final result  for classification: 
    def forward(self, x):
        x = self.linear1(x)
        x = torch.relu(x)
        x = self.linear2(x)
        return F.log_softmax(x, dim=1) 
 The  fit()  method is in charge of the training loop. First, we initialize a loss function and an optimizer that will be used during the  training process: 
    def fit(self, data, epochs):
        criterion = torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
        optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(self.parameters(), lr=0.01, weight_decay=5e-4) 
 A regular PyTorch training loop is then implemented. We use our  accuracy()  function on top of the  loss function: 
        self.train()
        for epoch in range(epochs+1):
            optimizer.zero_grad()
            out = self(data.x)
            loss = criterion(out[data.train_mask], data.y[data.train_mask])
            acc = accuracy(out[data.train_mask].argmax(dim=1), data.y[data.train_mask])
            loss.backward()
            optimizer.step() 
 In the  same loop, we plot the loss  and accuracy for training and evaluation data every  20 epochs: 
            if epoch % 20 == 0:
                val_loss = criterion(out[data.val_mask], data.y[data.val_mask])
                val_acc = accuracy(out[data.val_mask].argmax(dim=1), data.y[data.val_mask])
                print(f'Epoch {epoch:>3} | Train Loss: {loss:.3f} | Train Acc: {acc*100:>5.2f}% | Val Loss: {val_loss:.2f} | Val Acc: {val_acc*100:.2f}%') 
 The  test()  method evaluates the model on the test set and returns the  accuracy score: 
    def test(self, data):
        self.eval()
        out = self(data.x)
        acc = accuracy(out.argmax(dim=1)[data.test_mask], data.y[data.test_mask])
        return acc 
 
 Now that our class is complete, we can create, train, and test an instance  of MLP. 
 We have two  datasets, so we need a model  dedicated to  Cora  and another one for  Facebook Page-Page . First, let’s train an MLP  on  Cora : 
 
 We create an MLP model and print it to check that our layers  are correct: 
mlp = MLP(dataset.num_features, 16, dataset.num_classes)
print(mlp) 
 This gives us the  following output: 
 MLP( 
   (linear1): Linear(in_features=1433, out_features=16, bias=True) 
   (linear2): Linear(in_features=16, out_features=7, bias=True) 
 ) 
 Good, we get the right number of features. Let’s train this model for  100 epochs: 
mlp.fit(data, epochs=100) 
 Here are the metrics that are printed in the  training loop: 
 Epoch   0 | Train Loss: 1.954 | Train Acc: 14.29% | Val Loss: 1.93 | Val Acc: 30.80% 
 Epoch  20 | Train Loss: 0.120 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 1.42 | Val Acc: 49.40% 
 Epoch  40 | Train Loss: 0.015 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 1.46 | Val Acc: 50.40% 
 Epoch  60 | Train Loss: 0.008 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 1.44 | Val Acc: 53.40% 
 Epoch  80 | Train Loss: 0.008 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 1.40 | Val Acc: 54.60% 
 Epoch 100 | Train Loss: 0.009 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 1.39 | Val Acc: 54.20% 
 Finally, we  can evaluate its performance in terms of accuracy with the  following lines: 
acc = mlp.test(data)
print(f'MLP test accuracy: {acc*100:.2f}%') 
 We  obtain the following accuracy score on  test data: 
 MLP test accuracy: 52.50% 
 We repeat the same process for the  Facebook Page-Page  dataset, and here is the output  we obtain: 
 Epoch   0 | Train Loss: 1.398 | Train Acc: 23.94% | Val Loss: 1.40 | Val Acc: 24.21% 
 Epoch  20 | Train Loss: 0.652 | Train Acc: 74.52% | Val Loss: 0.67 | Val Acc: 72.64% 
 Epoch  40 | Train Loss: 0.577 | Train Acc: 77.07% | Val Loss: 0.61 | Val Acc: 73.84% 
 Epoch  60 | Train Loss: 0.550 | Train Acc: 78.30% | Val Loss: 0.60 | Val Acc: 75.09% 
 Epoch  80 | Train Loss: 0.533 | Train Acc: 78.89% | Val Loss: 0.60 | Val Acc: 74.79% 
 Epoch 100 | Train Loss: 0.520 | Train Acc: 79.49% | Val Loss: 0.61 | Val Acc: 74.94% 
 MLP test accuracy: 74.52% 
 
 Even though these datasets are similar in some aspects, we can see that the accuracy scores we obtain are vastly different. This will make an interesting comparison when we combine node features and network topology in the  same model. 
 Classifying nodes with vanilla graph neural networks 
 Instead of  directly introducing  well-known GNN architectures, let’s try to build our own model to understand the thought process behind GNNs. First, we need to go back to the definition of a simple  linear layer. 
 A basic neural network layer corresponds to a linear transformation  , where   is the input vector of node   and   is the weight matrix. In PyTorch, this equation can be implemented with the  torch.mm()  function, or with the  nn.Linear  class that adds other parameters such  as biases. 
 With our graph datasets, the input vectors are node features. It means that nodes are completely separate from each other. This is not enough to capture a good understanding of the graph: like a pixel in an image, the context of a node is essential to understand it. If you look at a group of pixels instead of a single one, you can recognize edges, patterns, and so on. Likewise, to understand a node, you need to look at  its neighborhood. 
 Let’s call   the set of neighbors of node  . Our  graph linear layer  can  be written  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 You can  imagine several variants  of this equation. For instance, we could have a weight matrix   dedicated to the central node, and another one   for the neighbors. Note that we cannot have a weight matrix per neighbor, as this number can change from node  to node. 
 We’re talking about neural networks, so we can’t apply the previous equation to each node. Instead, we perform matrix multiplications that are much more efficient. For instance, the equation of the linear layer can be rewritten as  , where   is the  input matrix. 
 In our case, the adjacency matrix   contains the connections between every node in the graph. Multiplying the input matrix by this adjacency matrix will directly sum up the neighboring node features. We can add  self  loops to the adjacency matrix so that the central node is also considered in this operation. We call this updated adjacency matrix  . Our graph linear layer can be rewritten  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Let’s test this layer by implementing it in PyTorch Geometric. We’ll then be able to use it as a regular  layer to build  a GNN: 
 
 First, we create a new class, which is a subclass  of  torch.nn.Module : 
class VanillaGNNLayer(torch.nn.Module): 
 This class takes two parameters,  dim_in  and  dim_out , for the number of features of the input and the output, respectively. We add a basic linear transformation  without bias: 
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_out):
        super().__init__()
        self.linear = Linear(dim_in, dim_out, bias=False) 
 We  perform two operations – the linear transformation, and then the multiplication with the adjacency  matrix  : 
    def forward(self, x, adjacency):
        x = self.linear(x)
        x = torch.sparse.mm(adjacency, x)
        return x 
 
 Before we can create our vanilla GNN, we need to convert the edge index from our dataset ( data.edge_index ) in coordinate format to a dense adjacency matrix. We also need to include  self  loops; otherwise, the central nodes won’t be taken into account in their  own embeddings. 
 
 This is easily implemented with the  to_den_adj()  and  torch.eye()  functions: 
from torch_geometric.utils import to_dense_adj
adjacency = to_dense_adj(data.edge_index)[0]
adjacency += torch.eye(len(adjacency))
adjacency 
 
 Here is what the adjacency matrix  looks like: 
 
 tensor([[0., 0., 0.,  ..., 0., 0., 0.], 
         [0., 0., 0.,  ..., 0., 0., 0.], 
         [0., 0., 0.,  ..., 0., 0., 0.], 
         ..., 
         [0., 0., 0.,  ..., 0., 0., 0.], 
         [0., 0., 0.,  ..., 0., 0., 0.], 
         [0., 0., 0.,  ..., 0., 0., 0.]]) 
 Unfortunately, we  only see zeros in this tensor because it’s a sparse matrix. A more detailed print would show a  few connections between nodes (represented by ones). Now that we have our dedicated layer and the adjacency matrix, the implementation of the vanilla GNN is very similar to that of  the MLP. 
 
 We create a new class with two vanilla graph  linear layers: 
class VanillaGNN(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_h, dim_out):
        super().__init__()
        self.gnn1 = VanillaGNNLayer(dim_in, dim_h)
        self.gnn2 = VanillaGNNLayer(dim_h, dim_out) 
 We perform the same operations with our new layers, which take the adjacency matrix we previously calculated as an  additional input: 
    def forward(self, x, adjacency):
        h = self.gnn1(x, adjacency)
        h = torch.relu(h)
        h = self.gnn2(h, adjacency)
        return F.log_softmax(h, dim=1) 
 The  fit()  and  test()  methods  work in  the exact  same way: 
    def fit(self, data, epochs):
        criterion = torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
        optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(self.parameters(), lr=0.01, weight_decay=5e-4)
        self.train()
        for epoch in range(epochs+1):
            optimizer.zero_grad()
            out = self(data.x, adjacency)
            loss = criterion(out[data.train_mask], data.y[data.train_mask])
            acc = accuracy(out[data.train_mask].argmax(dim=1), data.y[data.train_mask])
            loss.backward()
            optimizer.step()
            if epoch % 20 == 0:
                val_loss = criterion(out[data.val_mask], data.y[data.val_mask])
                val_acc = accuracy(out[data.val_mask].argmax(dim=1), data.y[data.val_mask])
                print(f'Epoch {epoch:>3} | Train Loss: {loss:.3f} | Train Acc: {acc*100:>5.2f}% | Val Loss: {val_loss:.2f} | Val Acc: {val_acc*100:.2f}%')
    def test(self, data):
        self.eval()
        out = self(data.x, adjacency)
        acc = accuracy(out.argmax(dim=1)[data.test_mask], data.y[data.test_mask])
        return acc 
 We can  create, train, and  evaluate our model with the  following lines: 
gnn = VanillaGNN(dataset.num_features, 16, dataset.num_classes)
print(gnn)
gnn.fit(data, epochs=100)
acc = gnn.test(data)
print(f'\nGNN test accuracy: {acc*100:.2f}%') 
 This gives us the  following output: 
 VanillaGNN( 
   (gnn1): VanillaGNNLayer( 
     (linear): Linear(in_features=1433, out_features=16, bias=False) 
   ) 
   (gnn2): VanillaGNNLayer( 
     (linear): Linear(in_features=16, out_features=7, bias=False) 
   ) 
 ) 
 Epoch   0 | Train Loss: 2.008 | Train Acc: 20.00% | Val Loss: 1.96 | Val Acc: 23.40% 
 Epoch  20 | Train Loss: 0.047 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 2.04 | Val Acc: 74.60% 
 Epoch  40 | Train Loss: 0.004 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 2.49 | Val Acc: 75.20% 
 Epoch  60 | Train Loss: 0.002 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 2.61 | Val Acc: 74.60% 
 Epoch  80 | Train Loss: 0.001 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 2.61 | Val Acc: 75.20% 
 Epoch 100 | Train Loss: 0.001 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 2.56 | Val Acc: 75.00% 
 GNN test accuracy: 76.80% 
 
 We  replicate the same training process  with the  Facebook Page-Page  dataset. In order to obtain comparable results, the same experiment is repeated 100 times for each model on each dataset. The following table summarizes  the results: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MLP 
 
 
 GNN 
 
 
 
 
 Cora 
 
 
 53.47% 
 (± 1.81%) 
 
 
 74.98% 
 (± 1.50%) 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook 
 
 
 75.21% 
 (± 0.40%) 
 
 
 84.85% 
 (± 1.68%) 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5.4 – Summary of accuracy scores with a standard deviation 
 As we can  see, the MLP has poor accuracy on  Cora . It performs better on the  Facebook Page-Page  dataset but is still surpassed by our vanilla GNN in both cases. These results show the  importance of including topological information in node features. Instead of a tabular dataset, our GNN considers the entire neighborhood of each node, which leads to a 10-20% boost in terms of accuracy in these examples. This architecture is still crude, but it gives us a guideline to refine it and build even  better models. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we learned about the missing link between vanilla neural networks and GNNs. We built our own GNN architecture using our intuition and a bit of linear algebra. We explored two popular graph datasets from the scientific literature to compare our two architectures. Finally, we implemented them in PyTorch and evaluated their performance. The result is clear: even our intuitive version of a GNN completely outperforms the MLP on  both datasets. 
 In  Chapter 6 ,  Normalizing Embeddings with Graph Convolutional Networks , we refine our vanilla GNN architecture to correctly normalize its inputs. This graph convolutional network model is an incredibly efficient baseline we’ll keep using in the rest of the book. We will compare its results on our two previous datasets and introduce a new interesting task:  node regression. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] P. Sen, G. Namata, M. Bilgic, L. Getoor, B. Galligher, and T. Eliassi-Rad, “Collective Classification in Network Data”, AIMag, vol. 29, no. 3, p. 93, Sep. 2008.  Available:  https://ojs.aaai.org//index.php/aimagazine/article/view/2157 
 [2] B. Rozemberczki, C. Allen, and R. Sarkar, Multi-Scale Attributed Node Embedding. arXiv, 2019. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1909.13021.  Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.13021 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 6 
 Introducing Graph Convolutional Networks 
 The  Graph Convolutional Network  ( GCN ) architecture  is the blueprint of what a GNN looks like. Introduced by Kipf and Welling in 2017 [1], it is based on the idea of creating an efficient variant of  Convolutional Neural Networks  ( CNNs ) applied  to graphs. More accurately, it is an approximation of a graph convolution operation in graph signal processing. Thanks to its versatility and ease of use, the GCN has become the most popular GNN in scientific literature. More generally, it is the architecture of choice to create a solid baseline when dealing with  graph data. 
 In this chapter, we’ll talk about the limitations of our previous vanilla GNN layer. This will help us to understand the motivation behind GCNs. We’ll detail how the GCN layer works and why it performs better than our solution. We’ll test this statement by implementing a GCN on the  Cora  and  Facebook Page-Page  datasets using PyTorch Geometric. This should improve our results  even further. 
 The last section is dedicated to a  new task:  node regression . This is not a very common task when it comes to GNNs, but it is particularly useful when you’re working with tabular data. If you have the opportunity to transform your tabular dataset into a graph, this will enable you to perform regression in addition  to classification. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will be able to implement a GCN in PyTorch Geometric for classification or regression tasks. Thanks to linear algebra, you’ll understand why this model performs better than our vanilla GNN. Finally, you’ll know how to plot node degrees and the density distribution of a  target variable. 
 In this chapter, we’ll cover the  following topics: 
 
 Designing the graph  convolutional layer 
 Comparing graph convolutional and graph  linear layers 
 Predicting web traffic with  node regression 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter06 . 
 Installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  section of  this book. 
 Designing the graph convolutional layer 
 First, let’s talk about  a problem we did not anticipate in the previous chapter. Unlike tabular or image data, nodes do not always have the same number of neighbors. For instance, in  Figure 6 .1 , node   has 3 neighbors while node   only  has 1: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6.1 – Simple graph where nodes have different numbers of neighbors 
 However, if  we look at our GNN layer, we don’t take into account this difference in the number of neighbors. Our layer consists of a simple sum without any normalization coefficient. Here is how we calculated the embedding of a  node,  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 Imagine that node   has 1,000 neighbors and node   only has 1: the embedding   will have much larger values than  . This is an issue because we want to compare these embeddings. How are we supposed to make meaningful comparisons when their values are so  vastly different? 
 Fortunately, there  is a simple solution: dividing the embedding by the number of neighbors. Let’s write  , the degree of node  . Here is the new formula for the  GNN layer: 
 
 
 
 
 
 But how do we translate it into a matrix multiplication? As a reminder, this was what we obtained for our vanilla  GNN layer: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,  . 
 The only thing that is missing from this formula is a matrix to give us the normalization coefficient,  . This is something that can be obtained thanks to the degree matrix  , which counts the number of neighbors for each node. Here is the degree matrix for the graph shown in  Figure 6 .1 : 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here is the same matrix  in NumPy: 
 
import numpy as np
D = np.array([
    [3, 0, 0, 0],
    [0, 1, 0, 0],
    [0, 0, 2, 0],
    [0, 0, 0, 2]
]) 
 By  definition,   gives us the degree of each node,  . Therefore, the inverse of this matrix   directly gives us the normalization  coefficients,  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 The  inverse of a matrix can directly be calculated using  the  numpy.linalg.inv() function: 
 
np.linalg.inv(D)
 array([[0.33333333, 0.        , 0.        , 0.        ], 
        [0.        , 1.        , 0.        , 0.        ], 
        [0.        , 0.        , 0.5       , 0.        ], 
        [0.        , 0.        , 0.        , 0.5       ]]) 
 This is exactly what we were looking for. To be even more accurate, we added self-loops to the graph, represented by  . Likewise, we should add self-loops to the degree matrix,  . The final matrix we are actually interested in  is  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 NumPy has  a specific function,  numpy.identity(n) , to quickly create an identity matrix   of   dimensions. In this example, we have  four dimensions: 
 
np.linalg.inv(D + np.identity(4))
 array([[0.25      , 0.        , 0.        , 0.        ], 
        [0.        , 0.5       , 0.        , 0.        ], 
        [0.        , 0.        , 0.33333333, 0.        ], 
        [0.        , 0.        , 0.        , 0.33333333]]) 
 Now that we have our matrix of normalization coefficients, where should we put it in the formula? There are  two options: 
 
  will normalize every row  of features. 
 will normalize every column  of features. 
 
 We can verify this experimentally by calculating    and  . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indeed, in  the first case, the sum of every row is equal to 1. In the second case, the sum of every column is equal  to 1. 
 Matrix multiplications can be performed using the  numpy.matmul()  function. Even more conveniently, Python has had its own matrix multiplication operator,  @ , since version 3.5. Let’s define the adjacency matrix   and use this operator to compute our  matrix multiplications: 
 
A = np.array([
    [1, 1, 1, 1],
    [1, 1, 0, 0],
    [1, 0, 1, 1],
    [1, 0, 1, 1]
])
print(np.linalg.inv(D + np.identity(4)) @ A)
 [[0.25       0.25       0.25       0.25      ] 
  [0.5        0.5        0.         0.        ] 
  [0.33333333 0.         0.33333333 0.33333333] 
  [0.33333333 0.         0.33333333 0.33333333]] 
print(A @ np.linalg.inv(D + np.identity(4)))
 [[0.25       0.5        0.33333333 0.33333333] 
  [0.25       0.5        0.         0.        ] 
  [0.25       0.         0.33333333 0.33333333] 
  [0.25       0.         0.33333333 0.33333333]] 
 We obtain  the same results as with manual  matrix multiplication. 
 So, which option should we use? Naturally, the first option looks more appealing because it nicely normalizes neighboring  node features. 
 However, Kipf and Welling [1] noticed that features from nodes with a lot of neighbors spread very easily, unlike features from more isolated nodes. In the original GCN paper, the authors proposed a hybrid normalization to counterbalance this effect. In practice, they assign higher weights to nodes with few neighbors using the  following formula: 
 
 
 
 
 
 In terms of individual embeddings, this operation can be written  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Those are  the original formulas to implement a graph convolutional layer. As with our vanilla GNN layer, we can stack these layers to create a GCN. Let’s implement a GCN and verify that it performs better than our  previous approaches. 
 Comparing graph convolutional and graph linear layers 
 In the  previous chapter, our vanilla GNN outperformed the Node2Vec model, but how does it compare to a GCN? In this section, we will compare their performance on the Cora and Facebook  Page-Page datasets. 
 Compared to the vanilla GNN, the main feature of the GCN is that it considers node degrees to weigh its features. Before the real implementation, let’s analyze the node degrees in both datasets. This information is relevant since it is directly linked to the performance of  the GCN. 
 From what we know about this architecture, we expect it to perform better when node degrees vary greatly. If every node has the same number of neighbors, these architectures are equivalent: ( ): 
 
 We import the  Planetoid  class from PyTorch Geometric. To visualize the node degrees, we also import  matplotlib  and two additional classes:  degree  to get the number of neighbors of each node and  Counter  to count the number of nodes for  each degree: 
from torch_geometric.datasets import Planetoid
from torch_geometric.utils import degree
from collections import Counter
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt 
 The Cora dataset is imported and its graph is stored  in  data : 
dataset = Planetoid(root=".", name="Cora")
data = dataset[0] 
 We  compute the number of neighbors of each node in  the graph: 
degrees = degree(data.edge_index[0]).numpy() 
 To produce a more natural visualization, we count the number of nodes for  each degree: 
numbers = Counter(degrees) 
 Let’s plot this result using a  bar plot: 
fig, ax = plt.subplots()
ax.set_xlabel('Node degree')
ax.set_ylabel('Number of nodes')
plt.bar(numbers.keys(), numbers.values()) 
 
 That gives us the  following plot. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6.2 – Number of nodes with specific node degrees in the Cora dataset 
 This  distribution looks exponential with a heavy tail: it ranges from 1 neighbor (485 nodes) to 168 neighbors (1 node)! This is exactly the kind of dataset where we want a normalization process to consider  this disbalance. 
 The same process is repeated with the Facebook Page-Page dataset with the  following result: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6.3 – Number of nodes with specific node degrees in the Facebook Page-Page dataset 
 This  distribution of node degrees looks even more skewed, with a number of neighbors that ranges from 1 to 709. For the same reason, the Facebook Page-Page dataset is also a good case in which to apply  a GCN. 
 We could build our own graph layer but, conveniently enough, PyTorch Geometric already has a predefined GCN layer. Let’s implement it on the Cora  dataset first: 
 
 We import PyTorch and the GCN layer from  PyTorch Geometric: 
import torch
import torch.nn.functional as F
from torch_geometric.nn import GCNConv 
 We create a function to calculate the  accuracy score: 
def accuracy(pred_y, y):
    return ((pred_y == y).sum() / len(y)).item() 
 We create a GCN class with a  __init_()  function that takes three parameters as input: the number of input dimensions,  dim_in , the number of hidden dimensions,  dim_h , and the number of output  dimensions,  dim_out : 
class GCN(torch.nn.Module):
    """Graph Convolutional Network"""
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_h, dim_out):
        super().__init__()
        self.gcn1 = GCNConv(dim_in, dim_h)
        self.gcn2 = GCNConv(dim_h, dim_out) 
 The  forward  method is identical, and has two GCN layers. A log  softmax  function  is applied to the result  for classification: 
    def forward(self, x, edge_index):
        h = self.gcn1(x, edge_index)
        h = torch.relu(h)
        h = self.gcn2(h, edge_index)
        return F.log_softmax(h, dim=1) 
 The  fit()  method is the same, with the exact same parameters for the  Adam  optimizer (a learning rate of 0.1 and L2 regularization  of 0.0005): 
    def fit(self, data, epochs):
        criterion = torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
        optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(self.parameters(),
                                    lr=0.01,
                                    weight_decay=5e-4)
        self.train()
        for epoch in range(epochs+1):
            optimizer.zero_grad()
            out = self(data.x, data.edge_index)
            loss = criterion(out[data.train_mask], data.y[data.train_mask])
            acc = accuracy(out[data.train_mask].argmax(dim=1), data.y[data.train_mask])
            loss.backward()
            optimizer.step()
            if(epoch % 20 == 0):
                val_loss = criterion(out[data.val_mask], data.y[data.val_mask])
                val_acc = accuracy(out[data.val_mask].argmax(dim=1), data.y[data.val_mask])
                print(f'Epoch {epoch:>3} | Train Loss: {loss:.3f} | Train Acc: {acc*100:>5.2f}% | Val Loss: {val_loss:.2f} | Val Acc: {val_acc*100:.2f}%') 
 We  implement the same  test()  method: 
    @torch.no_grad()
    def test(self, data):
        self.eval()
        out = self(data.x, data.edge_index)
        acc = accuracy(out.argmax(dim=1)[data.test_mask], data.y[data.test_mask])
        return acc 
 Let’s instantiate and train our model for  100  epochs: 
gcn = GCN(dataset.num_features, 16, dataset.num_classes)
print(gcn)
gcn.fit(data, epochs=100) 
 Here is  the output of  the training: 
 GCN( 
   (gcn1): GCNConv(1433, 16) 
   (gcn2): GCNConv(16, 7) 
 ) 
 Epoch   0 | Train Loss: 1.963 | Train Acc:  8.57% | Val Loss: 1.96 | Val Acc: 9.80% 
 Epoch  20 | Train Loss: 0.142 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.82 | Val Acc: 78.40% 
 Epoch  40 | Train Loss: 0.016 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.77 | Val Acc: 77.40% 
 Epoch  60 | Train Loss: 0.015 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.76 | Val Acc: 76.40% 
 Epoch  80 | Train Loss: 0.018 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.75 | Val Acc: 76.60% 
 Epoch 100 | Train Loss: 0.017 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.75 | Val Acc: 77.20% 
 Finally, let’s evaluate it on the  test set: 
acc = gcn.test(data)
print(f'GCN test accuracy: {acc*100:.2f}%')
 GCN test accuracy: 79.70% 
 
 If we  repeat this experiment 100 times, we obtain an average accuracy score of 80.17% (± 0.61%), which is significantly higher than the 74.98% (± 1.50%) obtained by our  vanilla GNN. 
 The exact same model is then applied to the Facebook Page-Page dataset, where it obtains an average accuracy of 91.54% (± 0.28%). Once again, it is significantly higher than the result obtained by the vanilla GNN, with only 84.85% (± 1.68%). The following table summarizes the accuracy scores with  standard deviation: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MLP 
 
 
 GNN 
 
 
 GCN 
 
 
 
 
 Cora 
 
 
 53.47% 
 (± 1.81%) 
 
 
 74.98% 
 (± 1.50%) 
 
 
 80.17% 
 (± 0.61%) 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook 
 
 
 75.21% 
 (± 0.40%) 
 
 
 84.85% 
 (± 1.68%) 
 
 
 91.54% 
 (± 0.28%) 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6.4 – Summary of accuracy scores with standard deviation 
 We can attribute these high scores to the wide range of node degrees in these two datasets. By normalizing features and considering the number of neighbors of the central node and its own neighbors, the GCN gains a lot of flexibility and can work well with various types  of graphs. 
 Nonetheless, node classification is not the only task that GNNs can perform. In the next section, we’ll see a new type of application that is rarely covered in  the literature. 
 Predicting web traffic with node regression 
 In  machine learning,  regression  refers to the  prediction of continuous values. It is often contrasted with  classification , where  the goal  is to find the correct categories (which are not continuous). In graph data, their counterparts are node classification and node regression. In this section, we will try to predict a continuous value instead of a categorical variable for  each node. 
 The dataset  we will use is the Wikipedia Network (GNU General Public License v3.0), introduced by Rozemberckzi et al. in 2019 [2]. It is composed of three page-page networks: chameleons (2,277 nodes and 31,421 edges), crocodiles (11,631 nodes and 170,918 edges), and squirrels (5,201 nodes and 198,493 edges). In these datasets, nodes represent articles and edges are mutual links between them. Node features reflect the presence of particular words in the articles. Finally, the goal is to predict the log average monthly traffic of  December 2018. 
 In this section, we  will apply a GCN to predict this traffic on the  chameleon dataset: 
 
 We import the Wikipedia Network and download the chameleon dataset. We apply the  transform  function,  RandomNodeSplit() , to randomly create an evaluation mask and a  test mask: 
from torch_geometric.datasets import WikipediaNetwork
import torch_geometric.transforms as T
dataset = WikipediaNetwork(root=".", name="chameleon", transform = T.RandomNodeSplit(num_val=200, num_test=500))
data = dataset[0] 
 We print information about  this dataset: 
print(f'Dataset: {dataset}')
print('-------------------')
print(f'Number of graphs: {len(dataset)}')
print(f'Number of nodes: {data.x.shape[0]}')
print(f'Number of unique features: {dataset.num_features}')
print(f'Number of classes: {dataset.num_classes}') 
 
 This is the output  we obtain: 
 
 Dataset: WikipediaNetwork() 
 ------------------- 
 Number of graphs: 1 
 Number of nodes: 2277 
 Number of unique features: 2325 
 Number of classes: 5 
 
 There is a  problem with our dataset: the output says that we have five classes. However, we want to perform  node regression, not classification. So  what happened? 
 
 In fact, these five classes are bins of the continuous values we want to predict. Unfortunately, these labels are not the ones we want: we have to change them manually. First, let’s download the  wikipedia.zip  file from the following page:  https://snap.stanford.edu/data/wikipedia-article-networks.xhtml . After unzipping the file, we import  pandas  and use it to load  the targets: 
 
import pandas as pd
df = pd.read_csv('wikipedia/chameleon/musae_chameleon_target.csv') 
 
 We apply a log function to the target values using  np.log10()  because the goal is to predict the log average  monthly traffic: 
values = np.log10(df['target']) 
 We redefine  data.y  as a tensor of the continuous values from the previous step. Note that these values are not normalized in this example, which is a good practice that is usually implemented. We will not perform it here for ease  of exposition: 
data.y = torch.tensor(values)
 tensor([2.2330, 3.9079, 3.9329,  ..., 1.9956, 4.3598, 2.4409], dtype=torch.float64) 
 
 Once  again, it is a good idea to visualize the node degrees as we did for the two previous datasets. We use the exact same code to produce the  following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6.5 – Number of nodes with specific node degrees in the Wikipedia Network 
 This  distribution has a shorter tail than the previous ones but keeps a similar shape: most nodes have one or a few neighbors, but some of them act as “hubs” and can connect more than  80 nodes. 
 In the case of node regression, the distribution of node degrees is not the only type of distribution we should check: the distribution of our target values is also essential. Indeed, non-normal distribution (such as node degrees) tends to be harder to predict. We can use the Seaborn library to plot the target values and compare them to a normal distribution provided  by  scipy.stats.norm : 
 
import seaborn as sns
from scipy.stats import norm
df['target'] = values
sns.distplot(df['target'], fit=norm) 
 This  gives us the  following plot: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6.6 – Density plot of target values from the Wikipedia Network 
 This  distribution is not exactly normal, but it is not exponential like the node degrees either. We can expect our model to perform well to predict  these values. 
 Let’s implement it step by step with  PyTorch Geometric: 
 
 We define the GCN class and the  __init__()  function. This time, we have three  GCNConv  layers with a decreasing number of neurons. The idea behind this encoder architecture is to force the model to select the most relevant features to predict the target values. We also added a linear layer to output a prediction that is not limited to a number between 0 or -1  and 1: 
class GCN(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_h, dim_out):
        super().__init__()
        self.gcn1 = GCNConv(dim_in, dim_h*4)
        self.gcn2 = GCNConv(dim_h*4, dim_h*2)
        self.gcn3 = GCNConv(dim_h*2, dim_h)
        self.linear = torch.nn.Linear(dim_h, dim_out) 
 The  forward()  method  includes the new  GCNConv  and  nn.Linear  layers. There is  no need for a log  softmax  function here since we’re not predicting  a class: 
def forward(self, x, edge_index):
    h = self.gcn1(x, edge_index)
    h = torch.relu(h)
    h = F.dropout(h, p=0.5, training=self.training)
    h = self.gcn2(h, edge_index)
    h = torch.relu(h)
    h = F.dropout(h, p=0.5, training=self.training)
    h = self.gcn3(h, edge_index)
    h = torch.relu(h)
    h = self.linear(h)
    return h 
 The main change in the  fit()  method is the  F.mse_loss()  function, which replaces the cross-entropy loss used in classification tasks. The  Mean Squared Error  ( MSE ) will be  our main metric. It corresponds to the average of the squares of the errors and can be defined  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In  code, this is  how it  is implemented: 
    def fit(self, data, epochs):
        optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(self.parameters(),
                                      lr=0.02,
                                      weight_decay=5e-4)
        self.train()
        for epoch in range(epochs+1):
            optimizer.zero_grad()
            out = self(data.x, data.edge_index)
            loss = F.mse_loss(out.squeeze()[data.train_mask], data.y[data.train_mask].float())
            loss.backward()
            optimizer.step()
            if epoch % 20 == 0:
                val_loss = F.mse_loss(out.squeeze()[data.val_mask], data.y[data.val_mask])
                print(f"Epoch {epoch:>3} | Train Loss: {loss:.5f} | Val Loss: {val_loss:.5f}") 
 The MSE is also included in the  test()  method: 
    @torch.no_grad()
    def test(self, data):
        self.eval()
        out = self(data.x, data.edge_index)
        return F.mse_loss(out.squeeze()[data.test_mask], data.y[data.test_mask].float()) 
 We  instantiate the model with  128  hidden  dimensions and only  1  output dimension (the target value). It is trained on  200  epochs: 
gcn = GCN(dataset.num_features, 128, 1)
print(gcn)
gcn.fit(data, epochs=200)
 GCN( 
   (gcn1): GCNConv(2325, 512) 
   (gcn2): GCNConv(512, 256) 
   (gcn3): GCNConv(256, 128) 
   (linear): Linear(in_features=128, out_features=1, bias=True) 
 ) 
 Epoch   0 | Train Loss: 12.05177 | Val Loss: 12.12162 
 Epoch  20 | Train Loss: 11.23000 | Val Loss: 11.08892 
 Epoch  40 | Train Loss: 4.59072 | Val Loss: 4.08908 
 Epoch  60 | Train Loss: 0.82827 | Val Loss: 0.84340 
 Epoch  80 | Train Loss: 0.63031 | Val Loss: 0.71436 
 Epoch 100 | Train Loss: 0.54679 | Val Loss: 0.75364 
 Epoch 120 | Train Loss: 0.45863 | Val Loss: 0.73487 
 Epoch 140 | Train Loss: 0.40186 | Val Loss: 0.67582 
 Epoch 160 | Train Loss: 0.38461 | Val Loss: 0.54889 
 Epoch 180 | Train Loss: 0.33744 | Val Loss: 0.56676 
 Epoch 200 | Train Loss: 0.29155 | Val Loss: 0.59314 
 We  test it to obtain the MSE on the  test set: 
loss = gcn.test(data)
print(f'GCN test loss: {loss:.5f}')
 GCN test loss: 0.43005 
 
 This MSE loss is  not the most interpretable metric by itself. We can get more meaningful results using the two  following metrics: 
 
 The RMSE, which measures the average magnitude of  the error: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The  Mean Absolute Error  ( MAE ), which gives the mean absolute difference between the  predicted and  real values: 
 
 Let’s implement them  in Python: 
 
 We can  directly import the MSE and the MAE from the  scikit-learn library: 
from sklearn.metrics import mean_squared_error, mean_absolute_error 
 We convert the PyTorch tensors for the predictions into the NumPy arrays given by the model  using  .detach().numpy() : 
out = gcn(data.x, data.edge_index)
y_pred = out.squeeze()[data.test_mask].detach().numpy()
mse = mean_squared_error(data.y[data.test_mask], y_pred)
mae = mean_absolute_error(data.y[data.test_mask], y_pred) 
 We compute  the MSE and the MAE with their dedicated function. The RMSE is calculated as the square root of MSE  using  np.sqrt() : 
print('=' * 43)
print(f'MSE = {mse:.4f} | RMSE = {np.sqrt(mse):.4f} | MAE = {mae:.4f}')
print('=' * 43)
 =========================================== 
 MSE = 0.4300 | RMSE = 0.6558 | MAE = 0.5073 
 =========================================== 
 
 These metrics are useful for comparing different models, but it can be difficult to interpret the MSE and  the RMSE. 
 The best tool to  visualize the results of our model is a scatter plot, where the horizontal axis represents our predictions and the vertical axis represents the real values. Seaborn has a dedicated function ( regplot() ) for this type  of visualization: 
 
fig = sns.regplot(x=data.y[data.test_mask].numpy(), y=y_pred) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6.7 – Ground truth test values (x-axis) versus. predicted test values (y-axis) 
 We don’t  have a baseline to work with in this example, but this is a decent prediction with few outliers. It would work in a lot of applications, despite a minimalist dataset. If we wanted to improve these results, we could tune the hyperparameters and do more error analysis to understand where the outliers  come from. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we improved our vanilla GNN layer to correctly normalize features. This enhancement introduced the GCN layer and smart normalization. We compared this new architecture to Node2Vec and our vanilla GNN on the Cora and Facebook Page-Page datasets. Thanks to this normalization process, the GCN obtained the highest accuracy scores by a large margin in both cases. Finally, we applied it to node regression with the Wikipedia Network and learned how to handle this  new task. 
 In  Chapter 7 ,  Graph Attention Networks , we will go a step further by discriminating neighboring nodes based on their importance. We will see how to automatically weigh node features through a process called self-attention. This will improve our performance, as we will see by comparing it to the  GCN architecture. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling,  Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Networks . arXiv, 2016. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1609.02907.  Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907 . 
 [2] B. Rozemberczki, C. Allen, and R. Sarkar,  Multi-scale Attributed Node Embedding . arXiv, 2019. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1909.13021.  Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.13021 . 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 7 
 Graph Attention Networks 
 Graph Attention Networks  ( GATs ) are a  theoretical improvement over GCNs. Instead of static normalization coefficients, they propose weighting factors calculated by a process  called  self-attention . The same  process is at the core of one of the most successful deep learning  architectures: the  transformer , popularized  by  BERT  and  GPT-3 . Introduced by Veličković et al. in 2017, GATs have become one of the most popular GNN architectures thanks to excellent  out-of-the-box performance. 
 In this chapter, we will learn how the graph attention layer works in four steps. This is actually the perfect example for understanding how self-attention works in general. This theoretical background will allow us to implement a graph attention layer from scratch in  NumPy . We will build the matrices by ourselves to understand how their values are calculated at  each step. 
 In the last section, we’ll use a GAT on two node classification datasets:  Cora , and a new one called  CiteSeer . As anticipated in the last chapter, this will be a good opportunity to analyze our results a little further. Finally, we will compare the accuracy of this architecture with  a GCN. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will be able to implement a graph attention layer from scratch and a GAT  in  PyTorch Geometric  ( PyG ). You will learn about the differences between this architecture and a GCN. Furthermore, you will master an error analysis tool for  graph data. 
 In this chapter, we’ll cover the  following topics: 
 
 Introducing the graph  attention layer 
 Implementing the graph attention layer  in NumPy 
 Implementing a GAT in  PyTorch Geometric 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter07 . 
 The installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  section of  this boo k. 
 Introducing the graph attention layer 
 The main idea  behind GATs is that some nodes are more important than others. In fact, this was already the case with the graph convolutional layer: nodes with few neighbors were more important than others, thanks to the normalization coefficient  . This approach is limiting because it only takes into account node degrees. On the other hand, the goal of the graph attention layer is to produce weighting factors that also consider the importance of  node features. 
 Let’s call our weighting  factors  attention scores  and note,  , the attention score between the nodes   and  . We can define the graph attention operator  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 An important characteristic of GATs is that the attention scores are calculated implicitly by comparing inputs to each other (hence the name  self -attention). In this section, we will see how to calculate these attention scores in four steps and also how to make an improvement to the graph  attention layer: 
 
 Linear transformation 
 Activation function 
 Softmax normalization 
 Multi-head attention 
 Improved graph  attention layer 
 
 First things first, let’s see how the linear transformation differs from  previous architectures. 
 Linear transformation 
 The attention score  represents the importance between a  central node   and a neighbor  . As stated previously, it requires  node features from both nodes. In the graph attention layer, it is represented by a concatenation between the hidden vectors   and  ,  . Here,   is a classic shared weight matrix to compute hidden vectors. An additional linear transformation is applied to this result with a dedicated learnable weight matrix  . During training, this matrix learns weights to produce attention coefficients  . This process is summarized by the  following formula: 
 
 
 
 
 
 This  output is given to an activation function like in traditional  neural networks. 
 Activation function 
 Nonlinearity is an  essential  component in neural networks to approximate nonlinear target functions. Such functions could not be captured by simply stacking linear layers, as their final outcome would still behave like a single  linear layer. 
 In the official implementation ( https://github.com/PetarV-/GAT/blob/master/utils/layers.py ), the authors chose the  Leaky Rectified Linear Unit  ( ReLU ) activation  function (see  Figure 7 .1 ). This function fixes the  dying ReLU  problem, where ReLU neurons only  output zero: 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7.1 – ReLU versus Leaky ReLU functions 
 This is  implemented by applying the Leaky ReLU function to the output of the  previous step: 
 
 
 
 
 
 However, we are now facing a new problem: the resulting values are  not normalized! 
 Softmax normalization 
 We want to compare different  attention scores, which means we  need normalized values on the same scale. In machine learning, it is common to use the softmax function for this purpose. Let’s call   the neighboring nodes of node  ,  including itself: 
 
 
 
 
 
 The result of this operation gives us our final attention scores  . But there’s another problem: self-attention is not  very stable. 
 Multi-head attention 
 This issue was already noticed  by Vaswani et al. (2017) in the original  transformer paper. Their proposed solution consists of calculating multiple embeddings with their own attention scores instead of a single one. This technique is called  multi-head attention. 
 The implementation is straightforward, as we just have to repeat the three previous steps multiple times. Each instance produces an embedding  , where   is the index of the attention head. There are two ways of combining  these results: 
 
 Averaging : With this, we  sum the different embeddings and normalize the result by the number of attention  heads  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Concatenation : Here, we  concatenate the different embeddings, which will produce a  larger matrix: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In practice, there is a  simple rule to know which one to use: we  choose the concatenation scheme when it’s a hidden layer and the average scheme when it’s the last layer of the network. The entire process can be summarized by the  following diagram: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7.2 – Calculating attention scores with multi-head attention 
 This is all there is to know  about the theoretical aspect of the  graph attention layer. However, since its inception in 2017, an improvement has  been suggested. 
 Improved graph attention layer 
 Brody et al. (2021) argued that the  graph attention layer only computes a static type of attention. This is an issue because there are simple graph problems we cannot express with a GAT. So they introduced an improved version, called GATv2, which computes a strictly more expressive  dynamic  attention. 
 Their solution consists of modifying the order of operations. The weight matrix   is applied after the concatenation and the attention weight matrix   after the   function. In summary, here is  the original  Graph Attentional Operator ,  also  GAT : 
 
 
 
 
 
 And this is the modified  operator, GATv2: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Which one should we use? According to Brody et al., GATv2  consistently outperforms the GAT and thus should be preferred. In addition to the theoretical proof, they also ran several experiments to show the performance of GATv2 compared to the original GAT. In the rest of this chapter, we will consider both options: the GAT in the second section and GATv2 in the  third section. 
 Implementing the graph attention layer in NumPy 
 As  previously stated, neural networks work in  terms of matrix multiplications. Therefore, we need to translate our individual embeddings into operations for the entire graph. In this section, we will implement the original graph attention layer from scratch to properly understand the inner workings of self-attention. Naturally, this process can be repeated several times to create  multi-head attention. 
 The first step consists of translating the original graph attention operator in terms of matrices. This is how we defined it in the  last section: 
 
 
 
 
 
 By taking inspiration from the graph linear layer, we can write  the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Where   is a matrix that stores  every  . 
 In this  example, we will use the following  graph from the  previous chapter: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7.3 – Simple graph where nodes have different numbers of neighbors 
 The graph must provide two important pieces of information: the adjacency matrix with self-loops   and the node features  . Let’s see how to implement it  in NumPy: 
 
 We  can build the adjacency  matrix from the connections in  Figure 7 .3 : 
import numpy as np
np.random.seed(0)
A = np.array([
    [1, 1, 1, 1],
    [1, 1, 0, 0],
    [1, 0, 1, 1],
    [1, 0, 1, 1]
])
array([[1, 1, 1, 1],
       [1, 1, 0, 0],
       [1, 0, 1, 1],
       [1, 0, 1, 1]]) 
 For  , we generate a random matrix of node features  using  np.random.uniform() : 
X = np.random.uniform(-1, 1, (4, 4))
array([[ 0.0976270,  0.4303787,  0.2055267,  0.0897663],
       [-0.1526904,  0.2917882, -0.1248255,  0.783546 ],
       [ 0.9273255, -0.2331169,  0.5834500,  0.0577898],
       [ 0.1360891,  0.8511932, -0.8579278, -0.8257414]]) 
 The  next step is to define our weight  matrices. Indeed, in graph attention layers, there are two of them: the regular weight matrix  , and the attention weight matrix  . There are different ways to initialize them (Xavier or He initialization, for example), but we can just reuse the same random function in  this example. 
 
 The matrix   has to be carefully designed as its dimensions are   Notice that   is already fixed because it represents the number of nodes in  . On the contrary, the value of   is arbitrary: we’ll choose   in  this example: 
 
W = np.random.uniform(-1, 1, (2, 4))
array([[-0.9595632,  0.6652396,  0.556313 ,  0.740024 ],
       [ 0.9572366,  0.5983171, -0.0770412,  0.5610583]]) 
 
 This  attention matrix is applied  to the concatenation of hidden vectors to produce a unique value. Thus, its size needs to  be  : 
W_att = np.random.uniform(-1, 1, (1, 4))
array([[-0.7634511,  0.2798420, -0.7132934,  0.8893378]]) 
 We want to concatenate hidden vectors from source and destination nodes. A simple way to obtain pairs of source and destination nodes is to look at our adjacency matrix   in COO format: rows store source nodes, and columns store destination nodes. NumPy provides a quick and efficient way of doing it  with  np.where() : 
connections = np.where(A > 0)
(array([0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3]),
 array([0, 1, 2, 3, 0, 1, 0, 2, 3, 0, 2, 3])) 
 We can  concatenate hidden  vectors of source and destination nodes  using  np.concatenate : 
np.concatenate([(X @ W.T)[connections[0]], (X @ W.T)[connections[1]]], axis=1)
array([[ 0.3733923,  0.3854852,  0.3733923,  0.3854852],
       [ 0.3733923,  0.3854852,  0.8510261,  0.4776527],
       [ 0.3733923,  0.3854852, -0.6775590,  0.7356658],
       [ 0.3733923,  0.3854852, -0.6526841,  0.2423597],
       [ 0.8510261,  0.4776527,  0.3733923,  0.3854852],
       [ 0.8510261,  0.4776527,  0.8510261,  0.4776527],
       [-0.6775590,  0.7356658,  0.3733923,  0.3854852],
       [-0.6775590,  0.7356658, -0.6775590,  0.7356658],
       [-0.6775590,  0.7356658, -0.6526841,  0.2423597],
       [-0.6526841,  0.2423597,  0.3733923,  0.3854852],
       [-0.6526841,  0.2423597, -0.6775590,  0.7356658],
       [-0.6526841,  0.2423597, -0.6526841,  0.2423597]]) 
 We then  apply a linear transformation  to this result with the attention  matrix  : 
a = W_att @ np.concatenate([(X @ W.T)[connections[0]], (X @ W.T)[connections[1]]], axis=1).T
array([[-0.1007035 , -0.35942847,  0.96036209,  0.50390318, -0.43956122, -0.69828618,  0.79964181,  1.8607074 ,  1.40424849,  0.64260322, 1.70366881,  1.2472099 ]]) 
 The second step consists of applying a Leaky ReLU function to the  previous outcome: 
def leaky_relu(x, alpha=0.2):
    return np.maximum(alpha*x, x)
e = leaky_relu(a)
array([[-0.0201407 , -0.07188569,  0.96036209,  0.50390318, -0.08791224,  -0.13965724,  0.79964181,  1.8607074 ,  1.40424849,  0.64260322,  1.70366881,  1.2472099 ]]) 
 We have the right values but need to place them correctly in a matrix. This matrix should look like   because there is no need for unnormalized attention scores when there is no connection between two nodes. To build this matrix, we know the sources   and destinations   thanks to  connections . So, the first value in  e  corresponds to  , the second value to  , but the seventh value corresponds  to   and not to  . We  can fill the matrix  as follows: 
E = np.zeros(A.shape)
E[connections[0], connections[1]] = e[0]
array([[-0.020140 , -0.0718856,  0.9603620,  0.5039031],
       [-0.0879122, -0.1396572,  0.       ,  0.       ],
       [ 0.7996418,  0.       ,  1.8607074,  1.4042484],
       [ 0.6426032,  0.       ,  1.7036688,  1.247209 ]]) 
 The next step is to normalize every row of attention scores. This requires a custom  softmax  function to produce our final  attention scores: 
def softmax2D(x, axis):
    e = np.exp(x - np.expand_dims(np.max(x, axis=axis), axis))
    sum = np.expand_dims(np.sum(e, axis=axis), axis)
    return e / sum
W_alpha = softmax2D(E, 1)
array([[0.15862414, 0.15062488, 0.42285965, 0.26789133],
       [0.24193418, 0.22973368, 0.26416607, 0.26416607],
       [0.16208847, 0.07285714, 0.46834625, 0.29670814],
       [0.16010498, 0.08420266, 0.46261506, 0.2930773 ]]) 
 This  attention matrix   provides  weights for every possible connection in the network. We can use it to calculate our matrix of embeddings  , which should give us two-dimensional vectors for  each node: 
H = A.T @ W_alpha @ X @ W.T
array([[-1.10126376,  1.99749693],
       [-0.33950544,  0.97045933],
       [-1.03570438,  1.53614075],
       [-1.03570438,  1.53614075]]) 
 
 Our graph  attention layer is now  complete! Adding multi-head attention consists of repeating these steps with different   and   before aggregating  the results. 
 The graph attention operator is an essential building block to developing GNNs. In the next section, we will use a PyG implementation to create  a GAT. 
 Implementing a GAT in PyTorch Geometric 
 We now  have a complete picture of how the graph attention  layer works. These layers can be stacked to create our new architecture of choice: the GAT. In this section, we will follow the guidelines from the original GAT paper to implement our own model using PyG. We will use it to perform node classification on the  Cora  and  CiteSeer  datasets. Finally, we will comment on these results and  compare them. 
 Let’s start with the  Cora  dataset: 
 
 We import  Cora  from the  Planetoid  class  using PyG: 
from torch_geometric.datasets import Planetoid
dataset = Planetoid(root=".", name="Cora")
data = dataset[0]
Data(x=[2708, 1433], edge_index=[2, 10556], y=[2708], train_mask=[2708], val_mask=[2708], test_mask=[2708]) 
 We  import the necessary libraries to  create our own GAT class, using the  GATv2 layer: 
import torch
import torch.nn.functional as F
from torch_geometric.nn import GATv2Conv
from torch.nn import Linear, Dropout 
 We implement the  accuracy()  function to evaluate the performance of  our model: 
def accuracy(y_pred, y_true):
    return torch.sum(y_pred == y_true) / len(y_true) 
 The class is initialized with two improved graph attention layers. Note it is important to declare the number of heads used for multi-head attention. The authors stated that eight heads improved performance for the first layer, but it didn’t make any difference for the  second one: 
class GAT(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_h, dim_out, heads=8):
        super().__init__()
        self.gat1 = GATv2Conv(dim_in, dim_h, heads=heads)
        self.gat2 = GATv2Conv(dim_h*heads, dim_out, heads=1) 
 Compared to the previous implementation of a GCN, we’re adding two dropout layers to prevent overfitting. These layers randomly zero some values from the input tensor with a predefined probability ( 0.6  in this case). Conforming to the original paper, we also use  the  Exponential Linear Unit  ( ELU ) function, which is the  exponential  version of the  Leaky ReLU: 
    def forward(self, x, edge_index):
        h = F.dropout(x, p=0.6, training=self.training)
        h = self.gat1(h, edge_index)
        h = F.elu(h)
        h = F.dropout(h, p=0.6, training=self.training)
        h = self.gat2(h, edge_index)
        return F.log_softmax(h, dim=1) 
 The  fit()  function is identical to the GCN’s. The parameters of the Adam optimizer have been tuned to match the best values for the  Cora  dataset, according to  the authors: 
    def fit(self, data, epochs):
        criterion = torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
        optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(self.parameters(), lr=0.01, weight_decay=0.01)
        self.train()
        for epoch in range(epochs+1):
            optimizer.zero_grad()
            out = self(data.x, data.edge_index)
            loss = criterion(out[data.train_mask], data.y[data.train_mask])
            acc = accuracy(out[data.train_mask].argmax(dim=1), data.y[data.train_mask])
            loss.backward()
            optimizer.step()
            if(epoch % 20 == 0):
                val_loss = criterion(out[data.val_mask], data.y[data.val_mask])
                val_acc = accuracy(out[data.val_mask].argmax(dim=1), data.y[data.val_mask])
                print(f'Epoch {epoch:>3} | Train Loss: {loss:.3f} | Train Acc: {acc*100:>5.2f}% | Val Loss: {val_loss:.2f} | Val Acc: {val_acc*100:.2f}%') 
 The  test()  function  is exactly   the same: 
    @torch.no_grad()
    def test(self, data):
        self.eval()
        out = self(data.x, data.edge_index)
        acc = accuracy(out.argmax(dim=1)[data.test_mask], data.y[data.test_mask])
        return acc 
 We create a GAT and train it for  100  epochs: 
gat = GAT(dataset.num_features, 32, dataset.num_classes)
gat.fit(data, epochs=100)
GAT(
  (gat1): GATv2Conv(1433, 32, heads=8)
  (gat2): GATv2Conv(256, 7, heads=1)
)
Epoch 0 | Train Loss: 1.978 | Train Acc: 12.86% | Val Loss: 1.94 | Val Acc: 13.80%
Epoch 20 | Train Loss: 0.238 | Train Acc: 96.43% | Val Loss: 1.04 | Val Acc: 67.40%
Epoch 40 | Train Loss: 0.165 | Train Acc: 98.57% | Val Loss: 0.95 | Val Acc: 71.00%
Epoch 60 | Train Loss: 0.209 | Train Acc: 96.43% | Val Loss: 0.91 | Val Acc: 71.80%
Epoch 80 | Train Loss: 0.172 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.93 | Val Acc: 70.80%
Epoch 100 | Train Loss: 0.190 | Train Acc: 97.86% | Val Loss: 0.96 | Val Acc: 70.80% 
 This  outputs the final  test accuracy: 
acc = gat.test(data)
print(f'GAT test accuracy: {acc*100:.2f}%')
GAT test accuracy: 81.10% 
 
 This accuracy score is slightly better than the average score we obtained with a GCN. We’ll make a proper comparison after applying the GAT architecture to the  second dataset. 
 We will  use a new  popular dataset for node classification called  CiteSeer  (MIT License). Like  Cora , it represents a network of research papers where each connection is a citation.  CiteSeer  involves  3327  nodes, whose features represent the presence (1) or absence (0) of  3703  words in a paper. The goal of this dataset is to correctly classify these nodes into six categories.  Figure 7 .4  shows a plot of  CiteSeer  made with  yEd Live: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7.4 – The CiteSeer dataset (made with yEd Live) 
 Compared to  Cora , this  dataset is larger in terms of the number of nodes (from 2,708 to 3,327) and also in terms of feature  dimensionality (from 1,433 to 3,703). However, the exact same process can be applied  to it: 
 
 First, we load the  CiteSeer  dataset: 
dataset = Planetoid(root=".", name="CiteSeer")
data = dataset[0]
Data(x=[3327, 3703], edge_index=[2, 9104], y=[3327], train_mask=[3327], val_mask=[3327], test_mask=[3327]) 
 For good measure, we plot the number of nodes per node degree, using the code from the  last chapter: 
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from torch_geometric.utils import degree
from collections import Counter
degrees = degree(dataset[0].edge_index[0]).numpy()
numbers = Counter(degrees)
fig, ax = plt.subplots(dpi=300)
ax.set_xlabel('Node degree')
ax.set_ylabel('Number of nodes')
plt.bar(numbers.keys(), numbers.values()) 
 It gives us the  following output: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7.5 – Number of nodes per node degree (CiteSeer) 
 Figure 7 .5  looks like  a typical heavy-tailed distribution but with a twist: some nodes have a degree of zero! In  other words, they are not connected to any other node. We can assume that they will be much more difficult to classify than  the rest. 
 
 We initialize a new GAT model with the correct number of input and output nodes and train it for  100  epochs: 
gat = GAT(dataset.num_features, 16, dataset.num_classes)
gat.fit(data, epochs=100)
Epoch   0 | Train Loss: 1.815 | Train Acc: 15.00% | Val Loss: 1.81 | Val Acc: 14.20%
Epoch  20 | Train Loss: 0.173 | Train Acc: 99.17% | Val Loss: 1.15 | Val Acc: 63.80%
Epoch  40 | Train Loss: 0.113 | Train Acc: 99.17% | Val Loss: 1.12 | Val Acc: 64.80%
Epoch  60 | Train Loss: 0.099 | Train Acc: 98.33% | Val Loss: 1.12 | Val Acc: 62.40%
Epoch  80 | Train Loss: 0.130 | Train Acc: 98.33% | Val Loss: 1.19 | Val Acc: 62.20%
Epoch 100 | Train Loss: 0.158 | Train Acc: 98.33% | Val Loss: 1.10 | Val Acc: 64.60% 
 We obtain the following test  accuracy score: 
acc = gat.test(data)
print(f'GAT test accuracy: {acc*100:.2f}%')
GAT test accuracy: 68.10% 
 
 Is it a good result? This time, we have no point  of comparison. 
 According to  Schur et al. in  Pitfalls of Graph Neural Network Evaluation , the GAT is slightly better than the GCN (82.8% ± 0.6% versus 81.9% ± 0.8%) on  Cora  and  CiteSeer  (71.0 ± 0.6% versus 69.5% ± 0.9%). The authors also note that the accuracy scores are not normally  distributed, making the usage of standard deviation less relevant. It is important to keep that in mind in this type  of benchmark. 
 Previously, I speculated that poorly connected nodes might negatively impact performance. We can verify this hypothesis by plotting the average accuracy score for each  node degree: 
 
 We get the  model’s classifications: 
out = gat(data.x, data.edge_index) 
 We calculate the degree of  each node: 
degrees = degree(data.edge_index[0]).numpy() 
 We store the accuracy scores and  sample sizes: 
accuracies = []
sizes = [] 
 We get the average accuracy for each node degree between zero and five using a mask  with  np.where() : 
for i in range(0, 6):
    mask = np.where(degrees == i)[0]
    accuracies.append(accuracy(out.argmax(dim=1)[mask], data.y[mask]))
    sizes.append(len(mask)) 
 We repeat this process for every node with a degree higher  than five: 
mask = np.where(degrees > 5)[0]
accuracies.append(accuracy(out.argmax(dim=1)[mask], data.y[mask]))
sizes.append(len(mask)) 
 We plot these  accuracy scores  with the corresponding  node degrees: 
fig, ax = plt.subplots(dpi=300)
ax.set_xlabel('Node degree')
ax.set_ylabel('Accuracy score')
plt.bar(['0','1','2','3','4','5','6+'], accuracies)
for i in range(0, 7):
    plt.text(i, accuracies[i], f'{accuracies[i]*100:.2f}%', ha='center', color='black')
for i in range(0, 7):
    plt.text(i, accuracies[i]//2, sizes[i], ha='center', color='white') 
 It  outputs  the  following graph: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7.6 – Accuracy score per node degree (CiteSeer) 
 Figure 7 .6  confirms our hypothesis: nodes with few neighbors are harder to classify correctly. Furthermore, it even shows that, in general, the higher the node degree, the better the accuracy score. This is quite natural because a higher number of neighbors will provide more information to the GNN to make  its predictions. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we introduced a new essential architecture: the GAT. We saw its inner workings with four main steps, from linear transformation to multi-head attention. We saw how it works in practice by implementing a graph attention layer in NumPy. Finally, we applied a GAT model (with GATv2) to the  Cora  and  CiteSeer  datasets, where it provided excellent accuracy scores. We showed that these scores were dependent on the number of neighbors, which is a first step toward  error analysis. 
 In  Chapter 8 ,  Scaling Graph Neural Networks with GraphSAGE , we will introduce a new architecture dedicated to managing large graphs. To test this claim, we will implement it on a new dataset several times bigger than what we’ve seen so far. We will talk about transductive and inductive learning, which is an important distinction for  GNN practitioners. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 Part 3: Advanced Techniques 
 In this third part of the book, we will delve into the more advanced and specialized GNN architectures that have been developed to solve a variety of graph-related problems. We will cover state-of-the-art GNN models designed for specific tasks and domains, which can address challenges and requirements more effectively. In addition, we will provide an overview of several new graph-based tasks that can be tackled using GNNs, such as link prediction and graph classification, and demonstrate their applications through practical code examples  and implementations. 
 By the end of this part, you will be able to understand and implement advanced GNN architectures and apply them to solve your own graph-based problems. You will have a comprehensive understanding of specialized GNNs and their respective strengths, as well as hands-on experience with code examples. This knowledge will equip you with the skills to apply GNNs to real-world use cases and potentially contribute to the development of new and innovative  GNN architectures. 
 This part comprises the  following chapters: 
 
 Chapter 8 , Scaling Up Graph Neural Networks with GraphSAGE 
 Chapter 9 , Defining Expressiveness for Graph Classification 
 Chapter 10 , Predicting Links with Graph Neural Networks 
 Chapter 11 , Generating Graphs Using Graph Neural Networks 
 Chapter 12 , Learning from Heterogeneous Graphs 
 Chapter 13 , Temporal Graph Neural Networks 
 Chapter 14 , Explaining Graph Neural Networks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 8 
 Scaling Up Graph Neural Networks  with GraphSAGE 
 GraphSAGE  is a  GNN architecture designed to handle large graphs. In the tech industry,  scalability  is a  key driver for growth. As a result, systems are inherently designed to accommodate millions of users. This ability requires a fundamental shift in how the GNN model works compared to GCNs and GATs. Thus, it is no surprise that GraphSAGE is the architecture of choice for tech companies such as Uber Eats  and Pinterest. 
 In this chapter, we  will learn about the two main ideas behind GraphSAGE. First, we will describe its  neighbor sampling  technique, which is at the core of its performance in terms of scalability. We will then explore three aggregation operators used to produce node embeddings. Besides the original approach, we will also detail the variants proposed by Uber Eats  and Pinterest. 
 Moreover, GraphSAGE offers new possibilities in terms of training. We will implement two ways of training a GNN for two tasks – node classification with  PubMed  and  multi-label classification  for  protein-protein interactions . Finally, we will discuss the benefits of a new  inductive  approach and how to  use it. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will understand how and why the neighbor sampling algorithm works. You will be able to implement it to create mini-batches and speed up training on most GNN architectures using a GPU. Furthermore, you will master inductive learning and multi-label classification  on graphs. 
 In this chapter, we will cover the  following topics: 
 
 Introducing GraphSAGE 
 Classifying nodes  on PubMed 
 Inductive learning on  protein-protein interactions 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter08 . 
 The installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  chapter of  this book. 
 Introducing GraphSAGE 
 Hamilton et al. introduced GraphSAGE in 2017 (see item [1] of the  Further reading  section) as a  framework for inductive representation learning on large graphs (with over 100,000 nodes). Its goal is to generate node embeddings for downstream tasks, such as node classification. In addition, it solves two issues with GCNs and GATs – scaling to large graphs and efficiently generalizing to unseen data. In this section, we will explain how to implement it by describing the two main components  of GraphSAGE: 
 
 Neighbor sampling 
 Aggregation 
 
 Let’s take a look  at them. 
 Neighbor sampling 
 So far, we  haven’t discussed an essential concept in traditional neural  networks –  mini-batching . It consists of dividing our dataset into smaller fragments, called batches. They are used in  gradient descent , the  optimization algorithm that finds the best weights and biases during training. There are three types of  gradient descent: 
 
 Batch gradient descent : Weights and  biases are  updated after a whole dataset has been processed (every epoch). This is the technique we have implemented so far. However, it is a slow process that requires the dataset to fit  in memory. 
 Stochastic gradient descent : Weights  and  biases are updated for each training example in the dataset. This is a noisy process because the errors are not averaged. However, it can be used to perform  online training. 
 Mini-batch gradient descent : Weights  and biases are updated at the end of every  mini-batch of   training examples. This technique is faster (mini-batches can be processed in parallel using a GPU) and leads to more stable convergence. In addition, the dataset can exceed the available memory, which is essential for handling  large graphs. 
 
 In practice, we  use more advanced optimizers  such as  RMSprop  or  Adam , which also  implement  mini-batching. 
 Dividing a tabular dataset is straightforward; it simply consists of selecting   samples (rows). However, this is an issue regarding graph datasets – how do we choose   nodes without breaking essential connections? If we’re not careful, we could end up with a collection of isolated nodes where we cannot perform  any aggregation. 
 We have to think about how GNNs use datasets. Every GNN layer computes node embeddings based on their neighbors. This means that computing an embedding only requires the direct neighbors of this node ( 1 hop ). If our GNN has two GNN layers, we need these neighbors and their own neighbors ( 2 hops ), and so on (see  Figure 8 .1 ). The rest of the network is irrelevant to computing these individual  node embeddings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8.1 – A graph with node 0 as the target node and the 1-hop and 2-hop neighbors 
 This  technique allows us to fill batches with computation  graphs, which describe the entire sequence of operations for calculating a node embedding.  Figure 8 .2  shows the computation graph of node  0  in a more  intuitive representation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8.2 – A computation graph for node 0 
 We need  to aggregate 2-hop neighbors in order to compute the  embedding of 1-hop neighbors. These embeddings are then aggregated to obtain the embedding of node 0. However, there are two problems with  this design: 
 
 The computation graph becomes exponentially large with respect to the number  of hops 
 Nodes with very high degrees of connectivity (such as celebrities on an online social network a social network), also  called  hub nodes , create enormous  computation graphs 
 
 To solve these issues, we have to limit the size of our computation graphs. In GraphSAGE, the authors propose a technique called neighbor sampling. Instead of adding every neighbor in the computation graph, we sample a predefined number of them. For instance, we choose only to keep (at most) three neighbors during the first hop and five neighbors during the second hop. Hence, the computation graph cannot exceed   nodes in  this case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8.3 – A computation graph with neighbor sampling to keep two 1-hop neighbors and two 2-hop neighbors 
 A low sampling  number is more efficient but makes the training more random (higher variance). Additionally, the number of GNN layers (hops) must stay  low to avoid exponentially large computation graphs. Neighbor sampling can handle large graphs, but it causes a trade-off by pruning important information, which can negatively impact performance such as accuracy. Note that computation graphs involve a lot of redundant calculations, which makes the entire process computationally  less efficient. 
 Nonetheless, this random sampling is not the only technique we can use. Pinterest has its own version of GraphSAGE, called PinSAGE, to power its recommender system (see  Further reading  [2]). It implements another sampling solution using random walks. PinSAGE keeps the idea of a fixed number of neighbors but implements random walks to see which nodes are the most frequently encountered. This frequency determines their relative importance. PinSAGE’s sampling strategy allows it to select the most critical nodes and proves more efficient  in practice. 
 Aggregation 
 Now  that we’ve seen how to select the neighboring nodes, we still need to  compute embeddings. This is performed by the aggregation operator (or aggregator). In GraphSAGE, the authors have proposed  three solutions: 
 
 A  mean aggregator 
 A  long short-term memory  ( LSTM ) aggregator 
 A  pooling aggregator 
 
 We will focus on the  mean aggregator, as it is the easiest to understand. First, the  mean aggregator  takes the embeddings of target nodes and their sampled neighbors to average them. Then, a linear transformation with a weight matrix,  , is applied to  this result: 
 The mean aggregator can be summarized by the following formula, where   is a non-linear function such as ReLU  or tanh: 
 
 
 
 
 
 In the case of PyG’s and Uber Eats’ implementation of GraphSAGE [3], we use two weight matrices instead of one; the first one is dedicated to the target node, and the second to the neighbors. This aggregator can be written  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 The  LSTM aggregator  is based on LSTM architecture, a popular recurrent neural network type. Compared to the mean aggregator, the LSTM aggregator can, in theory, discriminate between more graph structures and, thus, produce better embeddings. The issue is that recurrent neural networks only consider  sequences of inputs, such as a sentence with a beginning and an end. However, nodes do not have any sequence. Therefore, we perform random permutations of the node’s neighbors to address this problem. This solution allows us to use the LSTM architecture without relying on any sequence  of inputs. 
 Finally, the  pooling aggregator  works in two steps. First, every  neighbor’s embedding is fed to an MLP to produce a new vector. Secondly, an elementwise max operation is performed to only keep the highest value for  each feature. 
 We are not limited to these three options and could implement other aggregators in the GraphSAGE framework. Indeed, the main idea behind GraphSAGE resides in its efficient neighbor sampling. In the next section, we will use it to perform node classification on a  new dataset. 
 Classifying nodes on PubMed 
 In this section, we  will implement a GraphSAGE architecture to perform node classification on the  PubMed  dataset (available under the MIT license from  https://github.com/kimiyoung/planetoid ) [4]. 
 Previously, we  saw two other citation network datasets from the same Planetoid family –  Cora  and  CiteSeer . The  PubMed  dataset displays a similar but larger graph, with 19,717 nodes and 88,648 edges.  Figure 8 .3  shows a visualization of this dataset as created by  Gephi ( https://gephi.org/ ). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8.4 – A visualization of the PubMed dataset 
 Node  features are TF-IDF-weighted word vectors with 500 dimensions. The  goal is to correctly classify nodes into three categories – diabetes mellitus experimental, diabetes mellitus type 1, and diabetes mellitus type 2. Let’s implement it step by step  using PyG: 
 
 We load the  PubMed  dataset from the  Planetoid  class and print some information about  the graph: 
from torch_geometric.datasets import Planetoid
dataset = Planetoid(root='.', name="Pubmed")
data = dataset[0]
print(f'Dataset: {dataset}')
print('-------------------')
print(f'Number of graphs: {len(dataset)}')
print(f'Number of nodes: {data.x.shape[0]}')
print(f'Number of features: {dataset.num_features}')
print(f'Number of classes: {dataset.num_classes}')
print('Graph:')
print('------')
print(f'Training nodes: {sum(data.train_mask).item()}')
print(f'Evaluation nodes: {sum(data.val_mask).item()}')
print(f'Test nodes: {sum(data.test_mask).item()}')
print(f'Edges are directed: {data.is_directed()}')
print(f'Graph has isolated nodes: {data.has_isolated_nodes()}')
print(f'Graph has loops: {data.has_self_loops()}') 
 This  produces  the  following output: 
 Dataset: Pubmed() 
 ------------------- 
 Number of graphs: 1 
 Number of nodes: 19717 
 Number of features: 500 
 Number of classes: 3 
 Graph: 
 ------ 
 Training nodes: 60 
 Evaluation nodes: 500 
 Test nodes: 1000 
 Edges are directed: False 
 Graph has isolated nodes: False 
 Graph has loops: False 
 
 As you  can see, there are only 60 training nodes for 1,000 test nodes, which is quite challenging (a 6/94 split). Fortunately for us, with only 19,717 nodes,  PubMed  will be extremely fast to process  with GraphSAGE. 
 
 The first  step in the GraphSAGE framework is neighbor sampling. PyG implements the  NeighborLoader  class to perform it. Let’s keep 10 neighbors of our target node and 10 of their own neighbors. We will group our 60 target nodes into batches of 16 nodes, which should result in  four batches: 
from torch_geometric.loader import NeighborLoader
train_loader = NeighborLoader(
    data,
    num_neighbors=[10,10],
    batch_size=16,
    input_nodes=data.train_mask,
) 
 By printing  their information, let’s verify that we obtained  four  subgraphs (batches): 
for i, subgraph in enumerate(train_loader):
    print(f'Subgraph {i}: {subgraph}')
 Subgraph 0: Data(x=[400, 500], edge_index=[2, 455], y=[400], train_mask=[400], val_mask=[400], test_mask=[400], batch_size=16) 
 Subgraph 1: Data(x=[262, 500], edge_index=[2, 306], y=[262], train_mask=[262], val_mask=[262], test_mask=[262], batch_size=16) 
 Subgraph 2: Data(x=[275, 500], edge_index=[2, 314], y=[275], train_mask=[275], val_mask=[275], test_mask=[275], batch_size=16) 
 Subgraph 3: Data(x=[194, 500], edge_index=[2, 227], y=[194], train_mask=[194], val_mask=[194], test_mask=[194], batch_size=12) 
 These subgraphs contain more than 60 nodes, which is normal, since any neighbor can be sampled. We can even plot them like graphs using  matplotlib ’s subplots: 
import numpy as np
import networkx as nx
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from torch_geometric.utils import to_networkx
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(16,16))
for idx, (subdata, pos) in enumerate(zip(train_loader, [221, 222, 223, 224])):
    G = to_networkx(subdata, to_undirected=True)
    ax = fig.add_subplot(pos)
    ax.set_title(f'Subgraph {idx}', fontsize=24)
    plt.axis('off')
    nx.draw_networkx(G,
                    pos=nx.spring_layout(G, seed=0),
                    with_labels=False,
                    node_color=subdata.y,
                    )
plt.show() 
 We  obtain  the  following plot: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8.5 – A plot of the subgraphs obtained with neighbor sampling 
 Most  of these nodes have a degree of 1 because of  the way neighbor sampling works. In this case, it’s not an issue, since their embeddings are only used once in the computation graph to calculate the embeddings of the  second layer. 
 
 We implement the following function to evaluate the accuracy of  our model: 
def accuracy(pred_y, y):
    return ((pred_y == y).sum() / len(y)).item() 
 Let’s create a  GraphSAGE  class using two  SAGEConv  layers (the mean aggregator is selected  by default): 
import torchmport torch.nn.functional as F
from torch_geometric.nn import SAGEConv
class GraphSAGE(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_h, dim_out):
        super().__init__()
        self.sage1 = SAGEConv(dim_in, dim_h)
        self.sage2 = SAGEConv(dim_h, dim_out) 
 Embeddings  are computed using two mean aggregators. We  also use a nonlinear function ( ReLU ) and a  dropout layer: 
   def forward(self, x, edge_index):
        h = self.sage1(x, edge_index)
        h = torch.relu(h)
        h = F.dropout(h, p=0.5, training=self.training)
        h = self.sage2(h, edge_index)
        return F.log_softmax(h, dim=1) 
 Now that we have to consider batches, the  fit()  function has to change to loop through epochs and then through batches. The metrics we want to measure have to be reinitialized at  every epoch: 
    def fit(self, data, epochs):
        criterion = torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
        optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(self.parameters(), lr=0.01)
        self.train()
        for epoch in range(epochs+1):
            total_loss, val_loss, acc, val_acc = 0, 0, 0, 0 
 The  second  loop trains the model on  every batch: 
            for batch in train_loader:
                optimizer.zero_grad()
                out = self(batch.x, batch.edge_index)
                loss = criterion(out[batch.train_mask], batch.y[batch.train_mask])
                total_loss += loss
                acc += accuracy(out[batch.train_mask].argmax(dim=1), batch.y[batch.train_mask])
                loss.backward()
                optimizer.step()
                # Validation
                val_loss += criterion(out[batch.val_mask], batch.y[batch.val_mask])
                val_acc += accuracy(out[batch.val_mask].argmax(dim=1), batch.y[batch.val_mask]) 
 We also want to print our metrics. They must be divided by the number of batches to represent  an epoch: 
       if epoch % 20 == 0:
                print(f'Epoch {epoch:>3} | Train Loss: {loss/len(train_loader):.3f} | Train Acc: {acc/len(train_loader)*100:>6.2f}% | Val Loss: {val_loss/len(train_loader):.2f} | Val Acc: {val_acc/len(train_loader)*100:.2f}%') 
 The  test()  function  does not change, since we don’t use batches for the  test set: 
    @torch.no_grad()
    def test(self, data):
        self.eval()
        out = self(data.x, data.edge_index)
        acc = accuracy(out.argmax(dim=1)[data.test_mask], data.y[data.test_mask])
        return acc 
 Let’s  create a model with a hidden dimension of 64 and train it for  200 epochs: 
graphsage = GraphSAGE(dataset.num_features, 64, dataset.num_classes)
print(graphsage)
graphsage.fit(data, 200) 
 This gives us the  following output: 
 GraphSAGE( 
   (sage1): SAGEConv(500, 64, aggr=mean) 
   (sage2): SAGEConv(64, 3, aggr=mean) 
 ) 
 Epoch 0 | Train Loss: 0.317 | Train Acc: 28.77% | Val Loss: 1.13 | Val Acc: 19.55% 
 Epoch 20 | Train Loss: 0.001 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.62 | Val Acc: 75.07% 
 Epoch 40 | Train Loss: 0.000 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.55 | Val Acc: 80.56% 
 Epoch 60 | Train Loss: 0.000 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.35 | Val Acc: 86.11% 
 Epoch 80 | Train Loss: 0.002 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.64 | Val Acc: 73.58% 
 Epoch 100 | Train Loss: 0.000 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.79 | Val Acc: 74.72% 
 Epoch 120 | Train Loss: 0.000 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.71 | Val Acc: 76.75% 
 Epoch 140 | Train Loss: 0.000 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.75 | Val Acc: 67.50% 
 Epoch 160 | Train Loss: 0.000 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.63 | Val Acc: 73.54% 
 Epoch 180 | Train Loss: 0.000 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.47 | Val Acc: 86.11% 
 Epoch 200 | Train Loss: 0.000 | Train Acc: 100.00% | Val Loss: 0.48 | Val Acc: 78.37% 
 
 Note that  the mean aggregator was automatically  selected for both  SAGEConv layers. 
 
 Finally, let’s test it on the  test set: 
acc = graphsage.test(data)
print(f'GraphSAGE test accuracy: {acc*100:.2f}%')
 GraphSAGE test accuracy: 74.70% 
 
 Considering this dataset’s unfavorable train/test split, we obtain a decent test accuracy of 74.70%. However, GraphSAGE gets a lower average accuracy than a GCN (-0.5%) or a GAT (-1.4%) on  PubMed . So why should we  use it? 
 The answer is  evident when you train the three models – GraphSAGE is  extremely fast. On a consumer GPU, it is 4 times faster than a GCN and 88 times faster than a GAT. Even if GPU memory was not an issue, GraphSAGE could handle larger graphs, producing better results than  small networks. 
 To complete this deep-dive into GraphSAGE’s architecture, we must discuss one more feature – its  inductive capabilities. 
 Inductive learning on protein-protein interactions 
 In GNNs, we distinguish two types of learning –  transductive  and  inductive . They can be summarized  as follows: 
 
 In inductive learning, the  GNN only sees data from the training set during training. This is the typical supervised learning setting in machine learning. In this situation, labels are used to tune the  GNN’s parameters. 
 In transductive learning, the  GNN sees data from the training and test sets during training. However, it only learns data from the training set. In this situation, the labels are used for  information diffusion. 
 
 The transductive situation  should  be familiar, since it is the only one we have covered so far. Indeed, you can see in the previous example that GraphSAGE makes predictions using the whole graph during training ( self(batch.x, batch.edge_index) ). We then mask part of these predictions to calculate the loss and train the model only using training data ( criterion(out[batch.train_mask], batch.y[batch.train_mask]) ). 
 Transductive learning can only generate embeddings for a fixed graph; it does not generalize for unseen nodes or graphs. However, thanks to neighbor sampling, GraphSAGE is designed to make predictions at a local level with pruned computation graphs. It is considered an inductive framework, since it can be applied to any computation graph with the same  feature schema. 
 Let’s  apply it to a new dataset – the  protein-protein interaction ( PPI ) network, described by Agrawal et al. [5]. This dataset is a collection of 24 graphs, where nodes (21,557) are human proteins and edges (342,353) are physical interactions between proteins in a human cell.  Figure 8 .6  shows a representation of  PPI  made  with Gephi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8.6 – A visualization of the protein-protein interaction network 
 The goal of the dataset is to perform multi-label classification with 121 labels. This means that every node can range from 0 to 121 labels. This differs from a multi-class classification, where every node would only have  one class. 
 Let’s  implement a new GraphSAGE model  using PyG: 
 
 We load the  PPI  dataset with three different splits – train, validation,  and test: 
from torch_geometric.datasets import PPI
train_dataset = PPI(root=".", split='train')
val_dataset = PPI(root=".", split='val')
test_dataset = PPI(root=".", split='test') 
 The  training set comprises 20 graphs, while the validation and test sets only have two. We want to apply neighbor sampling to the training set. For convenience, let’s unify all the training graphs in a single set, using  Batch.from_data_list() , and then apply  neighbor sampling: 
from torch_geometric.data import Batch
from torch_geometric.loader import NeighborLoader
train_data = Batch.from_data_list(train_dataset)
loader = NeighborLoader(train_data, batch_size=2048, shuffle=True, num_neighbors=[20, 10], num_workers=2, persistent_workers=True) 
 The training set is ready. We can create our batches using the  DataLoader  class. We define a  batch_size  value of  2 , corresponding to the number of graphs in  each batch: 
from torch_geometric.loader import DataLoader
train_loader = DataLoader(train_dataset, batch_size=2)
val_loader = DataLoader(val_dataset, batch_size=2)
test_loader = DataLoader(test_dataset, batch_size=2) 
 One of  the main benefits of these batches is that they can be processed on a GPU. We can get a GPU if one is available, or take a  CPU otherwise: 
device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu') 
 Instead  of implementing GraphSAGE by ourselves, we can directly use PyTorch Geometric’s implementation from  torch_geometric.nn . We initialize it with two layers  and a hidden dimension of 512. In addition, we need to place the model on the same device as our data,  using  to(device) : 
from torch_geometric.nn import GraphSAGE
model = GraphSAGE(
    in_channels=train_dataset.num_features,
    hidden_channels=512,
    num_layers=2,
    out_channels=train_dataset.num_classes,
).to(device) 
 The  fit()  function is similar to the one we used in the previous section, with two exceptions. First, we want to move the data to a GPU when possible. Secondly, we have two graphs per batch, so we multiply the individual loss by  two ( data.num_graphs ): 
criterion = torch.nn.BCEWithLogitsLoss()
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.005)
def fit():
    model.train()
    total_loss = 0
    for data in train_loader:
        data = data.to(device)
        optimizer.zero_grad()
        out = model(data.x, data.edge_index)
        loss = criterion(out, data.y)
        total_loss += loss.item() * data.num_graphs
        loss.backward()
        optimizer.step()
    return total_loss / len(train_loader.dataset) 
 
 In the  test()  function, we  take advantage of the fact that  val_loader  and  test_loader  have two graphs and a  batch_size  value of 2. That means that the two graphs are in the same batch; we don’t need to loop through the loaders like  during training. 
 
 Instead  of accuracy, let’s use another metric – the F1 score. It corresponds to the harmonic mean of  precision and recall. However, our predictions are 121-dim vectors of real numbers. We need to transform them into binary vectors, using  out > 0  to compare them  to  data.y : 
from sklearn.metrics import f1_score
@torch.no_grad()
def test(loader):
    model.eval()
    data = next(iter(loader))
    out = model(data.x.to(device), data.edge_index.to(device))
    preds = (out > 0).float().cpu()
    y, pred = data.y.numpy(), preds.numpy()
    return f1_score(y, pred, average='micro') if pred.sum() > 0 else 0 
 Let’s  train our model for  300 epochs  and print the validation F1 score  during training: 
for epoch in range(301):
    loss = fit()
    val_f1 = test(val_loader)
    if epoch % 50 == 0:
        print(f'Epoch {epoch:>3} | Train Loss: {loss:.3f} | Val F1 score: {val_f1:.4f}')
 Epoch 0 | Train Loss: 0.589 | Val F1-score: 0.4245 
 Epoch 50 | Train Loss: 0.194 | Val F1-score: 0.8400 
 Epoch 100 | Train Loss: 0.143 | Val F1-score: 0.8779 
 Epoch 150 | Train Loss: 0.123 | Val F1-score: 0.8935 
 Epoch 200 | Train Loss: 0.107 | Val F1-score: 0.9013 
 Epoch 250 | Train Loss: 0.104 | Val F1-score: 0.9076 
 Epoch 300 | Train Loss: 0.090 | Val F1-score: 0.9154 
 Finally, we calculate the F1 score on the  test set: 
print(f'Test F1 score: {test(test_loader):.4f}')
 Test F1 score: 0.9360 
 
 We obtain  an excellent F1 score of 0.9360 in an inductive setting. This value dramatically changes when you increase or decrease the size of the hidden channels. You can try it for yourself with different values, such as 128 and 1,024 instead  of 512. 
 If you  look carefully at the code, there is no masking involved. Indeed, inductive learning is forced by the  PPI  dataset; the training, validation, and test data are in different graphs and loaders. Naturally, we could merge them using  Batch.from_data_list()  and fall back into a  transductive situation. 
 We could  also train GraphSAGE without labels using unsupervised learning. This is particularly useful when labels are scarce or provided by downstream applications. However, it requires a new loss function to encourage nearby nodes to have similar representations while ensuring that distant nodes have  distant embeddings: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   is a neighbor of   in a random walk,   is the sigmoid function,   is the negative sampling distribution for  , and   is the number of  negative samples: 
 Finally, PinSAGE and Uber Eats’ versions of GraphSAGE are recommender systems. They combine the unsupervised setting with a different loss because of this application. Their objective is to rank  the most relevant  entities (food, restaurants, pins, and so on) for each user, which is an entirely different task. To perform that, they implement a max-margin ranking loss that considers pairs  of embeddings. 
 If you need to  scale up GNNs, other solutions can be considered. Here are short descriptions of two  standard techniques: 
 
 Cluster-GCN  [6] provides a  different answer to the question of how to create mini-batches. Instead of neighbor sampling, it divides the graph into isolated communities. These communities are then processed as independent graphs, which can negatively impact the quality of the  resulting embeddings. 
 Simplifying GNNs  can decrease training and inference times. In practice, simplification consists of discarding nonlinear activation functions. Linear layers can then be compressed into one matrix multiplication using linear algebra. Naturally, these simplified versions are not as accurate as real GNNs on small datasets but are efficient for large graphs, such as  Twitter [7]. 
 
 As you can see, GraphSAGE is a flexible framework that can be tweaked and fine-tuned to suit your goals. Even if you don’t reuse its exact formulation, it introduces key concepts that greatly influence GNN architectures  in general. 
 Summary 
 This chapter introduced the GraphSAGE framework and its two components – the neighbor sampling algorithm and three aggregation operators. Neighbor sampling is at the core of GraphSAGE’s ability to process large graphs in a short amount of time. It is also responsible for its inductive setting, which allows it to generalize predictions to unseen nodes and graphs. We tested a transductive situation on  PubMed  and an inductive one to perform a new task on the  PPI  dataset – multi-label classification. While not as accurate as a GCN or a GAT, GraphSAGE is a popular and efficient framework for processing massive amounts  of data. 
 In  Chapter 9 ,  Defining Expressiveness for Graph Classification , we will try to define what makes a GNN powerful in terms of representation. We will introduce a famous graph algorithm called the Weisfeiler-Lehman isomorphism test. It will act as a benchmark to evaluate the theoretical performance of numerous GNN architectures, including the graph isomorphism network. We will apply this GNN to perform a new prevalent task –  graph classification. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec.  Inductive Representation Learning on Large Graphs . arXiv, 2017.  DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1706.02216. 
 [2] R. Ying, R. He, K. Chen, P. Eksombatchai, W. L. Hamilton, and J. Leskovec.  Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for Web-Scale Recommender Systems . Jul. 2018.  DOI: 10.1145/3219819.3219890. 
 [3] Ankit Jain.  Food Discovery with Uber Eats: Using Graph Learning to Power  Recommendations :  https://www.uber.com/en-US/blog/uber-eats-graph-learning/ . 
 [4]  Galileo Mark Namata, Ben London, Lise Getoor, and Bert Huang.  Query-Driven Active Surveying for Collective Classification . International Workshop on Mining and Learning with  Graphs. 2012. 
 [5] M. Agrawal, M. Zitnik, and J. Leskovec.  Large-scale analysis of disease pathways in the human interactome . Nov. 2017.  DOI: 10.1142/9789813235533_0011. 
 [6] W.-L. Chiang, X. Liu, S. Si, Y. Li, S. Bengio, and C.-J. Hsieh.  Cluster-GCN . Jul. 2019.  DOI: 10.1145/3292500.3330925. 
 [7] F. Frasca, E. Rossi, D. Eynard, B. Chamberlain, M. Bronstein, and F. Monti.  SIGN: Scalable Inception Graph Neural Networks . arXiv, 2020.  DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2004.11198. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 9 
 Defining Expressiveness for Graph Classification 
 In the previous chapter, we traded accuracy for scalability. We saw that it was instrumental in applications such as recommender systems. However, it raises several questions about what makes GNNs “accurate.” Where does this precision come from? Can we use this knowledge to design  better GNNs? 
 This chapter will clarify what makes a GNN powerful by introducing the  Weisfeiler-Leman  ( WL ) test. This test will give us the framework to understand an essential concept in GNNs –  expressiveness . We will use it to compare different GNN layers and see which one is the most expressive. This result will then be used to design a more powerful GNN than GCNs, GATs,  and GraphSAGE. 
 Finally, we will implement it using PyTorch Geometric to perform a new task – graph classification. We will implement a new GNN on the  PROTEINS  dataset, comprising 1,113 graphs representing proteins. We will compare different methods for graph classification and analyze  our results. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will understand what makes a GNN expressive and how to measure it. You will be able to implement a new GNN architecture based on the WL test and perform graph classification using  various techniques. 
 In this chapter, we will cover the following  main topics: 
 
 Defining expressiveness 
 Introducing  the GIN 
 Classifying graphs  with GIN 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter09 . 
 Installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  section of  this book. 
 Defining  expressiveness 
 Neural networks are used  to approximate functions. This is justified by the  universal approximation theorem , which states that a feedforward neural network with only one layer can approximate any smooth function. But what about universal function approximation on graphs? This is a more complex problem that requires the ability to distinguish  graph structures. 
 With GNNs, our goal is to produce the best node embeddings possible. This means that different nodes must have different embeddings, and similar nodes must have similar embeddings. But how do we know that two nodes are similar? Embeddings are computed using node features and connections. Therefore, we have to compare their features and neighbors to  distinguish nodes. 
 In graph theory, this is referred to  as the graph  isomorphism  problem. Two graphs are isomorphic (“the same”) if they have the same connections, and their only difference is a permutation of their nodes (see  Figure 9 .1 ). In 1968, Weisfeiler and Lehman [1] proposed an efficient algorithm to solve this problem, now known as the  WL test. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9.1 – An example of two isomorphic graphs 
 The WL test  aims to build  the  canonical form  of a graph. We can then compare the canonical form of two graphs to check whether they are isomorphic or not. However, this test is not perfect, and non-isomorphic graphs can share the same canonical form. This can be surprising, but it is an intricate problem that is still not completely understood; for instance, the complexity of the WL algorithm  is unknown. 
 The WL test works   as follows: 
 
 At the beginning, each node in the graph receives the  same color. 
 Each node aggregates its own color and the colors of  its neighbors. 
 The result is fed to a hash function that produces a  new color. 
 Each node aggregates its new color and the new colors of  its neighbors. 
 The result is fed to a hash function that produces a  new color. 
 These steps are repeated until no more nodes  change color. 
 
 The following figure summarizes  the  WL algorithm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9.2 – An application of the WL algorithm to get the canonical form of a graph 
 The resulting colors give us the canonical form of the graph. If two graphs do not share the same colors, they are not isomorphic. Conversely, we cannot be sure they are isomorphic if they obtain the  same colors. 
 The steps we described should be familiar; they are surprisingly close to what GNNs perform. Colors are a form of embeddings, and the hash function is an aggregator. But it is not just any aggregator; the hash  function is particularly suited for this task. Would it still be as efficient if we were to replace it with another function, such as a mean or max aggregator (as seen in  Chapter 8 )? 
 Let’s see the result for  each operator: 
 
 With the mean aggregator, having 1 blue node and 1 red node, or 10 blue nodes and 10 red nodes, results in the same embedding (half blue and  half red). 
 With the max aggregator, half of the nodes would be ignored in the previous example; the embedding would only consider the blue or  red color. 
 With the sum aggregator, however, every node contributes to the final embedding; having 1 red node and 1 blue node is different from having 10 blue nodes and 10  red nodes. 
 
 Indeed, the sum aggregator can discriminate more graph structures than the other two. If we follow this logic, this can only mean one thing – the aggregators we have been using so far are suboptimal, since they are strictly less expressive than a sum. Can we use this knowledge to build better GNNs? In the next section, we will introduce the  Graph Isomorphism Network  ( GIN ) based on  this idea. 
 Introducing the GIN 
 In the  previous section, we saw that the GNNs introduced in the previous chapters were less expressive than the WL test. This is an issue because the ability to distinguish more graph structures seems to be connected to the quality of the resulting embeddings. In this section, we will translate the theoretical framework into a new GNN architecture –  the GIN. 
 Introduced in 2018 by Xu et al. in a paper called “ How Powerful are Graph Neural Networks? ” [2], the GIN is designed to be as expressive as the WL test. The authors generalized our observations on aggregation by dividing it into  two functions: 
 
 Aggregate : This function,  , selects  the neighboring nodes that the  GNN considers 
 Combine : This  function,  , combines the embeddings from the selected nodes to produce the new embedding of the  target node 
 
 The embedding of the   node can be written as  the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 In the case of a GCN, the   function aggregates every neighbor of the   node, and   applies a specific mean aggregator. In the case of GraphSAGE, the neighborhood sampling is the   function, and we saw three options for   – the mean, LSTM, and  max aggregators. 
 So, what are these functions in the GIN? Xu et al. argue that they  have to be  injective . As shown in  Figure 9 .3 , injective functions map distinct inputs to distinct outputs. This is precisely what we want to distinguish graph structures. If the functions were not injective, we would end up with the same output for different inputs. In this case, our embeddings would be less valuable because they would contain  less information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9.3 – A mapping diagram of an injective function 
 The GIN’s  authors use a clever trick to design these two functions – they simply approximate them. In the GAT layer, we learned the self-attention weights. In this example, we can learn both functions using a single MLP, thanks to the universal  approximation theorem: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   is a learnable parameter or a fixed scalar, representing the importance of the target node’s embedding compared to its neighbors’. The authors also emphasize that the MLP must have more than one layer to distinguish specific  graph structures. 
 We now have a GNN that is as expressive as the WL test. Can we do even better? The answer is yes. The WL test can be generalized to a hierarchy of higher-level tests known as  k-WL . Instead of  considering individual nodes,  -WL tests look at  -tuples of nodes. It means that they are non-local, since they can look at distant nodes. This is also why  -WL tests can distinguish more graph structures than  -WL tests  for  . 
 Several architectures based on  -WL tests have been proposed, such  as the  k-GNN  by Morris et al. [3]. While these architectures help us better understand how GNNs work, they tend to underperform in practice compared to less expressive models, such as GNNs or GATs [4]. But all hope is not lost, as we will see in the next section in the particular context of  graph classification. 
 Classifying graphs using GIN 
 We  could directly implement a GIN model for node classification, but this architecture is more interesting for performing graph classification. In this section, we will see how to transform node embeddings into graph embeddings  using  global pooling  techniques. We will then apply these techniques to the  PROTEINS  dataset and compare our results using GIN and  GCN models. 
 Graph classification 
 Graph classification  is based on the node embeddings that a GNN produces. This operation is often called global pooling or  graph-level readout . There  are three simple ways of  implementing it: 
 
 Mean global pooling : The  graph embedding   is obtained  by averaging the embeddings of every node in  the graph: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Max global pooling : The  graph embedding is obtained by selecting  the highest value for each  node dimension: 
 
 
 Sum global pooling : The graph  embedding is obtained by  summing the embeddings of every node in  the graph: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 According to  what we saw in the first section, the sum global pooling is strictly more expressive than the two other techniques. The GIN’s authors also note that to consider all structural information, it is necessary to consider embeddings produced by every layer of the GNN. In summary, we concatenate the sum of node embeddings produced by each of the  k  layers of  our GNN: 
 
 
 
 
 
 This solution elegantly combines the expressive power of the sum operator with the memory of each layer provided by  the concatenation. 
 Implementing the GIN 
 We  will now implement a GIN model with the previous graph-level readout function on the  PROTEINS [5, 6,  7]  dataset. 
 This dataset comprises 1,113 graphs representing proteins, where every node is an amino acid. An edge connects two nodes when their distance is lower than 0.6 nanometers. The goal of this dataset is to classify each protein as an  enzyme . Enzymes are a particular  type of protein that act as catalysts to speed up chemical reactions in a cell. For instance, enzymes called lipases aid in the digestion of food.  Figure 9 .4  shows the 3D plot of  a protein. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9.4 – An example of a protein in 3D 
 Let’s implement  a GIN model on  this dataset: 
 
 First, we import the  PROTEINS  dataset using the  TUDataset  class from PyTorch Geometric and print  the information: 
from torch_geometric.datasets import TUDataset
dataset = TUDataset(root='.', name='PROTEINS').shuffle()
print(f'Dataset: {dataset}')
print('-----------------------')
print(f'Number of graphs: {len(dataset)}')
print(f'Number of nodes: {dataset[0].x.shape[0]}')
print(f'Number of features: {dataset.num_features}')
print(f'Number of classes: {dataset.num_classes}')
 Dataset: PROTEINS(1113) 
 ----------------------- 
 Number of graphs: 1113 
 Number of nodes: 30 
 Number of features: 0 
 Number of classes: 2 
 We  split the data (graphs) into training, validation, and test sets with an 80/10/10  split respectively: 
from torch_geometric.loader import DataLoader
train_dataset = dataset[:int(len(dataset)*0.8)]
val_dataset   = dataset[int(len(dataset)*0.8):int(len(dataset)*0.9)]
test_dataset  = dataset[int(len(dataset)*0.9):]
print(f'Training set   = {len(train_dataset)} graphs')
print(f'Validation set = {len(val_dataset)} graphs')
print(f'Test set       = {len(test_dataset)} graphs') 
 This gives us the  following output: 
 Training set   = 890 graphs 
 Validation set = 111 graphs 
 Test set       = 112 graphs 
 We  convert these splits into mini-batches using the  DataLoader  object with a batch size of 64. This means that each batch will contain up to  64 graphs: 
train_loader = DataLoader(train_dataset, batch_size=64, shuffle=True)
val_loader   = DataLoader(val_dataset, batch_size=64, shuffle=True)
test_loader  = DataLoader(test_dataset, batch_size=64, shuffle=True) 
 We can verify that by printing information about each batch,  as follows: 
print('\nTrain loader:')
for i, batch in enumerate(train_loader):
    print(f' - Batch {i}: {batch}')
print('\nValidation loader:')
for i, batch in enumerate(val_loader):
    print(f' - Batch {i}: {batch}')
print('\nTest loader:')
for i, batch in enumerate(test_loader):
    print(f' - Batch {i}: {batch}')
 Train loader: 
  - Batch 0: DataBatch(edge_index=[2, 8622], x=[2365, 0], y=[64], batch=[2365], ptr=[65]) 
  - Batch 1: DataBatch(edge_index=[2, 6692], x=[1768, 0], y=[64], batch=[1768], ptr=[65]) 
 … 
  - Batch 13: DataBatch(edge_index=[2, 7864], x=[2102, 0], y=[58], batch=[2102], ptr=[59]) 
 Validation loader: 
  - Batch 0: DataBatch(edge_index=[2, 8724], x=[2275, 0], y=[64], batch=[2275], ptr=[65]) 
  - Batch 1: DataBatch(edge_index=[2, 8388], x=[2257, 0], y=[47], batch=[2257], ptr=[48]) 
 Test loader: 
  - Batch 0: DataBatch(edge_index=[2, 7906], x=[2187, 0], y=[64], batch=[2187], ptr=[65]) 
  - Batch 1: DataBatch(edge_index=[2, 9442], x=[2518, 0], y=[48], batch=[2518], ptr=[49]) 
 
 Let’s start  implementing a GIN model. The first question we have to answer is the composition of our GIN layer. We need an MLP with at least two layers. Following the authors’ guidelines, we can also introduce batch normalization to standardize the inputs of each hidden layer, which stabilizes and speeds up training. In summary, our GIN layer has the  following composition: 
 
 
 
 
 
 In code, it is defined  as follows: 
 
import torch
torch.manual_seed(0)
import torch.nn.functional as F
from torch.nn import Linear, Sequential, BatchNorm1d, ReLU, Dropout
from torch_geometric.nn import GINConv
from torch_geometric.nn import global_add_pool
class GIN(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_h):
        super(GIN, self).__init__()
        self.conv1 = GINConv(
            Sequential(Linear(dataset.num_node_features, dim_h), BatchNorm1d(dim_h), ReLU(), Linear(dim_h, dim_h), ReLU()))
        self.conv2 = GINConv(
            Sequential(Linear(dim_h, dim_h), BatchNorm1d(dim_h), ReLU(), Linear(dim_h, dim_h), ReLU()))
        self.conv3 = GINConv(
            Sequential(Linear(dim_h, dim_h), BatchNorm1d(dim_h), ReLU(), Linear(dim_h, dim_h), ReLU())) 
 Note 
 PyTorch Geometric also offers  the GINE layer, a modified version of the GIN layer. It was introduced in 2019 by Hu et al. in “ Strategies for Pre-training Graph Neural Networks ” [8]. Its major improvement over the previous GIN version is the ability to consider edge features during the aggregation process. The  PROTEINS  dataset does not have edge features, which is why we will implement the classic GIN  model instead. 
 
 Our model is not complete yet. We must not forget that we want to perform graph classification. It requires the sum of every node embedding in the graph for each layer. In other words, we will need to store one vector of  dim_h  size per layer – three, in this example. This is why we add a linear layer with  3*dim_h  size before the final linear layer for binary classification ( data.num_classes  =  2): 
        self.lin1 = Linear(dim_h*3, dim_h*3)
        self.lin2 = Linear(dim_h*3, dataset.num_classes) 
 We must  implement the logic to connect our initialized layers. Each layer produces a different embedding tensor –  h1 ,  h2 , and  h3 . We sum them using the  global_add_pool()  function and then concatenate them with  torch.cat() . This gives us the input to our classifier, which acts as a regular neural network with a  dropout layer: 
    def forward(self, x, edge_index, batch):
        # Node embeddings
        h1 = self.conv1(x, edge_index)
        h2 = self.conv2(h1, edge_index)
        h3 = self.conv3(h2, edge_index)
        # Graph-level readout
        h1 = global_add_pool(h1, batch)
        h2 = global_add_pool(h2, batch)
        h3 = global_add_pool(h3, batch)
        # Concatenate graph embeddings
        h = torch.cat((h1, h2, h3), dim=1)
        # Classifier
        h = self.lin1(h)
        h = h.relu()
        h = F.dropout(h, p=0.5, training=self.training)
        h = self.lin2(h)
        return F.log_softmax(h, dim=1) 
 We can  now implement a regular training loop with mini-batching for  100 epochs: 
def train(model, loader):
    criterion = torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
    optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.01)
    epochs = 100
    model.train()
    for epoch in range(epochs+1):
        total_loss = 0
        acc = 0
        val_loss = 0
        val_acc = 0
        # Train on batches
        for data in loader:
            optimizer.zero_grad()
            out = model(data.x, data.edge_index, data.batch)
            loss = criterion(out, data.y)
            total_loss += loss / len(loader)
            acc += accuracy(out.argmax(dim=1), data.y) / len(loader)
            loss.backward()
            optimizer.step()
            # Validation
            val_loss, val_acc = test(model, val_loader) 
 We print the  training and validation accuracy every 20 epochs and return the  trained model: 
        # Print metrics every 20 epochs
        if(epoch % 20 == 0):
            print(f'Epoch {epoch:>3} | Train Loss: {total_loss:.2f} | Train Acc: {acc*100:>5.2f}% | Val Loss: {val_loss:.2f} | Val Acc: {val_acc*100:.2f}%')
    return model 
 Unlike the  test  function from the previous chapter, this one must also include mini-batching, since our validation and test loaders contain more than  one batch: 
@torch.no_grad()
def test(model, loader):
    criterion = torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
    model.eval()
    loss = 0
    acc = 0
    for data in loader:
        out = model(data.x, data.edge_index, data.batch)
        loss += criterion(out, data.y) / len(loader)
        acc += accuracy(out.argmax(dim=1), data.y) / len(loader)
    return loss, acc 
 We  define the function we will use to calculate the  accuracy score: 
def accuracy(pred_y, y):
    return ((pred_y == y).sum() / len(y)).item() 
 Let’s instantiate and train our  GIN model: 
gin = GIN(dim_h=32)
gin = train(gin, train_loader)
 Epoch 0 | Train Loss: 1.33 | Train Acc: 58.04% | Val Loss: 0.70 | Val Acc: 59.97% 
 Epoch 20 | Train Loss: 0.54 | Train Acc: 74.50% | Val Loss: 0.55 | Val Acc: 76.86% 
 Epoch 40 | Train Loss: 0.50 | Train Acc: 76.28% | Val Loss: 0.56 | Val Acc: 74.73% 
 Epoch 60 | Train Loss: 0.50 | Train Acc: 76.77% | Val Loss: 0.54 | Val Acc: 72.04% 
 Epoch 80 | Train Loss: 0.49 | Train Acc: 76.95% | Val Loss: 0.57 | Val Acc: 73.67% 
 Epoch 100 | Train Loss: 0.50 | Train Acc: 76.04% | Val Loss: 0.53 | Val Acc: 69.55% 
 Finally, let’s  test it using the  test loader: 
test_loss, test_acc = test(gin, test_loader)
print(f'Test Loss: {test_loss:.2f} | Test Acc: {test_acc*100:.2f}%')
 Test Loss: 0.44 | Test Acc: 81.77% 
 
 To better understand this final test score, we can implement a GCN that performs graph classification with a simple global mean pooling ( global_mean_pool()  in PyTorch Geometric). With the exact same setting, it achieves an average accuracy score of 53.72% (± 0.73%) on 100 experiments. This is much lower than the average 76.56% (± 1.77%) obtained by the  GIN model. 
 We can conclude that the entire GIN architecture is much more suited for this graph classification task than GCNs. According to the theoretical framework we used, this is explained by the fact that GCNs are strictly less expressive than GINs. In other words, GINs can distinguish more graph structures than GCNs, which is why they are more accurate. We can verify this assumption by visualizing the mistakes made by  both models: 
 
 We import the  matplotlib  and  networkx  libraries to make a 4x4 plot  of proteins: 
import numpy as np
import networkx as nx
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from torch_geometric.utils import to_networkx
fig, ax = plt.subplots(4, 4) 
 For each  protein, we get the final classification from our GNN (the GIN in this case). We give the prediction a green color if it is correct ( red otherwise): 
for i, data in enumerate(dataset[-16:]):
    out = gcn(data.x, data.edge_index, data.batch)
    color = "green" if out.argmax(dim=1) == data.y else "red" 
 We convert our protein into a  networkx  graph for convenience. We can then draw it using the  nx.draw_networkx()  function: 
    ix = np.unravel_index(i, ax.shape)
    ax[ix].axis('off')
    G = to_networkx(dataset[i], to_undirected=True)
    nx.draw_networkx(G,
                    pos=nx.spring_layout(G, seed=0),
                    with_labels=False,
                    node_size=10,
                    node_color=color,
                    width=0.8,
                    ax=ax[ix]
                    ) 
 We obtain the following plot for the  GIN model. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9.5 – Graph classifications produced by the GIN model 
 
 We  repeat this process for the GCN and get the  following visualization. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9.6 – Graph classifications produced by the GCN model 
 As  expected, the GCN model makes more mistakes. Understanding which graph structures are not adequately captured would require extensive analysis for each protein correctly classified by GIN. However, we can see that the GIN also makes different mistakes. This is interesting because it shows that these models can  be complementary. 
 Creating ensembles from models that make different mistakes is a common technique in machine learning. We could use different approaches, such as a third model trained on our final classifications. As creating ensembles is not the goal of this chapter, we will implement a simple model-averaging  technique instead: 
 
 First, we set the models in evaluation mode and define the variables to store  accuracy scores: 
gcn.eval()
gin.eval()
acc_gcn = 0
acc_gin = 0
acc_ens = 0 
 We  get the final classifications for each model and combine them to get the  ensemble’s predictions: 
for data in test_loader:
    out_gcn = gcn(data.x, data.edge_index, data.batch)
    out_gin = gin(data.x, data.edge_index, data.batch)
    out_ens = (out_gcn + out_gin)/2 
 We calculate the accuracy scores for the three sets  of predictions: 
    acc_gcn += accuracy(out_gcn.argmax(dim=1), data.y) / len(test_loader)
    acc_gin += accuracy(out_gin.argmax(dim=1), data.y) / len(test_loader)
    acc_ens += accuracy(out_ens.argmax(dim=1), data.y) / len(test_loader) 
 Finally, let’s print  the results: 
print(f'GCN accuracy:     {acc_gcn*100:.2f}%')
print(f'GIN accuracy:     {acc_gin*100:.2f}%')
print(f'GCN+GIN accuracy: {acc_ens*100:.2f}%')
 GCN accuracy: 72.14% 
 GIN accuracy: 80.99% 
 GCN+GIN accuracy: 81.25% 
 
 In this  example, our ensemble outperforms both models with an accuracy score of 81.25% (compared to 72.14% for the GCN and 80.99% for the GIN). This result is significant, as it shows the possibilities offered by this kind of technique. However, this is not necessarily the case in general; even with this example, the ensemble model does not consistently outperform the GIN. We could enrich it with embeddings from other architectures, such as  Node2Vec , and see whether it improves the  final accuracy. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we defined the expressive power of GNNs. This definition is based on another algorithm, the WL method, which outputs the canonical form of a graph. This algorithm is not perfect, but it can distinguish most graph structures. It inspired the GIN architecture, designed to be as expressive as the WL test and, therefore, strictly more expressive than GCNs, GATs,  or GraphSAGE. 
 We then implemented this architecture for graph classification. We saw different methods to combine node embeddings into graph embeddings. GIN offers a new technique, which incorporates a sum operator and the concatenation of graph embeddings produced by every GIN layer. It significantly outperformed the classic global mean pooling obtained with GCN layers. Finally, we combined predictions made by both models into a simple ensemble, which increased the accuracy score  even further. 
 In  Chapter 10 , Predicting Links with Graph Neural Networks , we will explore another popular task with GNNs – link prediction. In fact, this is not entirely new, as previous techniques we saw such as  DeepWalk  and  Node2Vec  were already based on this idea. We will explain why and introduce two new GNN frameworks – the Graph (Variational) Autoencoder and SEAL. Finally, we will implement and compare them on the  Cora  dataset on a link  prediction task. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] Weisfeiler and Lehman, A.A. (1968) A Reduction of a Graph to a Canonical Form and an Algebra Arising during This Reduction. Nauchno-Technicheskaya  Informatsia, 9. 
 [2] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka,  How Powerful are Graph Neural Networks?  arXiv, 2018.  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1810.00826. 
 [3] C. Morris et al.,  Weisfeiler and Leman Go Neural: Higher-order Graph Neural Networks . arXiv, 2018.  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1810.02244. 
 [4] V. P. Dwivedi et al.  Benchmarking graph neural networks . arXiv, 2020.  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2003.00982. 
 [5] K. M. Borgwardt, C. S. Ong, S. Schoenauer, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, A. J. Smola, and H. P. Kriegel.  Protein function prediction via graph kernels . Bioinformatics, 21(Suppl 1):i47–i56,  Jun 2005. 
 [6] P. D. Dobson and A. J. Doig.  Distinguishing enzyme structures from non-enzymes without alignments . J. Mol. Biol., 330(4):771–783,  Jul 2003. 
 [7] Christopher Morris and Nils M. Kriege and Franka Bause and Kristian Kersting and Petra Mutzel and Marion Neumann.  TUDataset: A collection of benchmark datasets for learning with graphs . In ICML 2020 Workshop on Graph Representation Learning  and Beyond. 
 [8] W. Hu et al.,  Strategies for Pre-training Graph Neural Networks . arXiv, 2019.  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1905.12265. 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 10 
 Predicting Links with Graph Neural Networks 
 Link prediction  is  one of the most popular tasks performed with graphs. It is defined as the problem of predicting the existence of a link between two nodes. This ability is at the core of social networks and recommender systems. A good example is how social media networks display friends and followers you have in common with others. Intuitively, if this number is high, you are more likely to connect with these people. This likelihood is precisely what link prediction tries  to estimate. 
 In this chapter, we will first see how to perform link prediction without any machine learning. These traditional techniques are essential to understanding what GNNs learn. We will then refer to previous chapters about  DeepWalk  and  Node2Vec  to link prediction  through  matrix factorization . Unfortunately, these techniques have significant limitations, which is why we will transition to  GNN-based methods. 
 We will explore three methods from two different families. The first family is based on node embeddings and performs a GNN-based matrix factorization. The second method focuses on subgraph representation. The neighborhood around each link (fake or real) is considered an input to predict the link probability. Finally, we will implement a model of each family in  PyTorch Geometric. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will be able to implement various link prediction techniques. Given a link prediction problem, you will know which technique is the best suited to address it – heuristics, matrix factorization, GNN-based embeddings, or  subgraph-based techniques. 
 In this chapter, we will cover the following  main topics: 
 
 Predicting links with  traditional methods 
 Predicting links with  node embeddings 
 Predicting links  with SEAL 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter10 . 
 Installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  section of  this book. 
 Predicting links with traditional methods 
 The link prediction problem has been around for a long time, which is why numerous techniques have been proposed to solve it. First, this section will describe popular heuristics based on local and global neighborhoods. Then, we will introduce matrix factorization and its connection to DeepWalk  and Node2Vec. 
 Heuristic techniques 
 Heuristic techniques  are  a simple and practical way to predict links between nodes. They are easy to implement and offer strong baselines for this task. We can classify them based on the number of hops they perform (see  Figure 10 .1 ). Some of them only require 1-hop neighbors that are adjacent to the target nodes. More complex techniques also consider 2-hop neighbors or an entire graph. In this section, we will divide them into two categories –  local  (1-hop and 2-hop) and  global  heuristics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 10.1 – Graph with 1-hop, 2-hop, and 3-hop neighbors 
 Local heuristics  measure the  similarity between two nodes by  considering their local neighborhoods. We use   to denote the neighbors of node  . Here are three examples of popular  local heuristics: 
 
 Common neighbors  simply  counts the number of  neighbors two nodes have in common (1-hop neighbors). The idea is similar to our previous example with social networks – the more neighbors you have in common, the more likely you are to  be connected: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jaccard’s coefficient  measures  the proportion  of neighbors shared by two nodes (1-hop neighbors). It relies on the same idea as common neighbors but normalizes the result by the total number of neighbors. This rewards nodes with few interconnected neighbors instead of nodes with  high degrees: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The  Adamic–Adar index  sums  the  inverse logarithmic degree of neighbors shared by the two  target nodes (2-hop neighbors). The idea is that common neighbors with large neighborhoods are less significant than those with small neighborhoods. This is why they should have less importance in the  final score: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All these techniques rely on neighbors’ node degrees, whether they are direct (common neighbors or Jaccard’s coefficient) or indirect (the Adamic–Adar index). This is beneficial for speed and explainability but also limits the complexity of the relationships they  can capture. 
 Global heuristics  offer a solution to this problem by  considering an entire network instead of a local neighborhood. Here are two  well-known examples: 
 
 The  Katz index   computes  the weighted sum of every  possible path between two nodes. Weights correspond to a discount factor,   (usually between 0.8 and 0.9), to penalize longer paths. With this definition, two nodes are more likely to be connected if there are many (preferably short) paths between them. Paths of any length can be calculated using adjacency matrix powers,  , which is why the Katz index is defined  as follows: 
 
 
 Random walk with restart  [1] performs  random walks, starting from a target node. After  each walk, it increases the visit count of the current node. With an   probability, it restarts the walk at the target node. Otherwise, it continues its random walk. After a predefined number of iterations, we stop the algorithm, and we can suggest links between the target node and nodes with the highest visit counts. This idea is also essential in  DeepWalk  and  Node2Vec  algorithms. 
 
 Global heuristics  are usually more accurate but require knowing the entirety of a graph. However, they are not the only way to predict links with  this knowledge. 
 Matrix factorization 
 Matrix factorization  for link prediction  is inspired by the previous work on recommender systems [2]. With this technique, we indirectly predict links by predicting the entire adjacency matrix,  . This is performed using node embeddings – similar nodes,   and  , should have similar embeddings,   and   respectively. Using the dot product, we can write it  as follows: 
 
 If these nodes are similar,   should  be maximal 
 If these nodes are different,   should  be minimal 
 
 So far, we have assumed that similar nodes should be connected. This is why we can use this dot product to approximate each element (link) of the adjacency  matrix,  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 In terms of matrix multiplication, we have  the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   is the node embedding matrix. The following figure shows a visual explanation of how matrix  factorization works: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 10.2 – Matrix multiplication with node embeddings 
 This  technique is called  matrix factorization because the adjacency matrix,  , is decomposed into a product of two matrices. The goal is to learn relevant node embeddings that minimize the L2 norm between true and predicted elements,  , for the  graph,  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 There are more advanced variants of matrix factorization that include the Laplacian matrix and powers of  . Another solution consists of using models such as  DeepWalk  and  Node2Vec . They produce node embeddings that can be paired to create link representations. According to Qiu, et al. [3], these algorithms implicitly approximate and factorize complex matrices. For example, here is the matrix computed  by  DeepWalk : 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   is  the parameter for  negative sampling. The same can be said for similar algorithms, such as LINE and PTE. Although they can capture more complex relationships, they suffer from the same limitations that we saw in  Chapters 3  and  4 : 
 
 They cannot use node features : They only use topological information to  create embeddings 
 They have no inductive capabilities : They cannot generalize to nodes that were not in the  training set 
 They cannot capture structural similarity : Structurally similar nodes in the graph can obtain vastly  different embeddings 
 
 These limitations motivate the need for GNN-based techniques, as we will see in the  next sections. 
 Predicting links with node embeddings 
 In the  previous chapters, we saw how to use GNNs to produce node embeddings. A popular link prediction technique consists of using these embeddings to perform matrix factorization. This section will discuss two GNN architectures for link prediction – the  Graph Autoencoder  ( GAE ) and the  Variational Graph  Autoencoder  ( VGAE ). 
 Introducing Graph Autoencoders 
 Both architectures  were  introduced by Kipf and Welling in 2016 [5] in a three-page paper. They represent the GNN counterparts of two popular neural network architectures – the autoencoder and the variational autoencoder. Prior knowledge about these architectures is helpful but not necessary. For ease of understanding, we will first focus on  the GAE. 
 The GAE is composed of  two modules: 
 
 The  encoder  is a  classic two-layer GCN that computes node embeddings  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The  decoder  approximates  the adjacency matrix,  , using matrix factorization and a sigmoid function,  , to  output probabilities: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note that we are not trying to classify nodes or graphs. The goal is to predict a probability (between 0 and 1) for each element of the adjacency matrix,  . This is why the GAE is  trained using the binary cross-entropy loss (negative log-likelihood) between the elements of both  adjacency matrices: 
 
 
 
 
 
 However, adjacency matrices are often very sparse, which biases the GAE toward predicting zero values. There are two simple techniques to fix this bias. First, we can add a weight to favor   in the previous loss function. Secondly, we can sample fewer zero values during training, making labels more balanced. The latter technique is the one implemented by Kipf  and Welling. 
 This architecture is flexible – the encoder can be replaced with another type of GNN (GraphSAGE, for example), and an MLP can take the role of a decoder, for instance. Another possible improvement involves transforming the GAE into a probabilistic variant – the  Variational GAE. 
 Introducing VGAEs 
 The  difference  between GAEs and VGAEs is the same as between autoencoders and variational autoencoders. Instead of directly learning node embeddings, VGAEs learn normal distributions that are then sampled to produce embeddings. They are also divided into  two modules: 
 
 The  encoder  is composed  of two GCNs that share their first layer. The objective is to learn the parameters of each latent normal distribution – a mean,   (learned by  ), and a variance,   (in practice,   learned  by  ). 
 The  decoder  samples  embeddings,  , from the learned distributions,  , using the  reparametrization trick [4]. Then, it uses the same inner product between latent variables to approximate the adjacency  matrix,  . 
 
 With VGAEs, it is important to ensure that the encoder’s output follows a normal distribution. This is why  we add a new term to the loss function – the  Kullback-Leibler  ( KL ) divergence, which measures the divergence between two distributions. We obtain the following loss, also  called the  evidence lower  bound  ( ELBO ): 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   represents the encoder and   is the prior distribution  of  . 
 The model’s  performance is generally evaluated using two metrics – the area under the ROC ( AUROC ) curve and  the  average  precision  ( AP ). 
 Let’s see how to implement a VGAE using  PyTorch Geometric. 
 Implementing a VGAE 
 There are two  main  differences with previous  GNN implementations: 
 
 We will preprocess the dataset to remove links to  predict randomly. 
 We will create an encoder model that we will feed to a  VGAE  class, instead of directly implementing a VGAE  from scratch. 
 
 The following code is inspired by PyTorch Geometric’s  VGAE example: 
 
 First, we import the  required libraries: 
import numpy as np
np.random.seed(0)
import torch
torch.manual_seed(0)
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import torch_geometric.transforms as T
from torch_geometric.datasets import Planetoid 
 We try to use the GPU if  it’s available: 
device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu') 
 We create a  transform  object that normalizes input features, directly performs  tensor device conversion, and randomly splits links. In this example, we have an 85/5/10 split. The  add_negative_train_samples  parameter is set to  False  because the model already performs negative sampling, so it is not  needed in  the dataset: 
transform = T.Compose([
    T.NormalizeFeatures(),
    T.ToDevice(device),
    T.RandomLinkSplit(num_val=0.05, num_test=0.1, is_undirected=True, split_labels=True, add_negative_train_samples=False),
]) 
 We load the  Cora  dataset with the previous  transform  object: 
dataset = Planetoid('.', name='Cora', transform=transform) 
 The  RandomLinkSplit  produces a train/val/test split by design. We store these splits  as follows: 
train_data, val_data, test_data = dataset[0] 
 Now, let’s implement the encoder. First, we need to import  GCNConv   and  VGAE : 
from torch_geometric.nn import GCNConv, VGAE 
 We declare a new class. In this class, we want three GCN layers – a shared layer, a second layer to approximate mean values,  , and a third layer to approximate variance values (in practice, the log standard  deviation,  ): 
class Encoder(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_out):
        super().__init__()
        self.conv1 = GCNConv(dim_in, 2 * dim_out)
        self.conv_mu = GCNConv(2 * dim_out, dim_out)
        self.conv_logstd = GCNConv(2 * dim_out, dim_out)
    def forward(self, x, edge_index):
        x = self.conv1(x, edge_index).relu()
        return self.conv_mu(x, edge_index), self.conv_logstd(x, edge_index) 
 We  can initialize our  VGAE and give the encoder as input. By default, it will use the inner product as  a decoder: 
model = VGAE(Encoder(dataset.num_features, 16)).to(device)
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.01) 
 The  train()  function includes two important steps. First, the embedding matrix,  , is computed using  model.encode() ; the name might be counter-intuitive, but  this function does sample embeddings from the learned distributions. Then, the ELBO loss is computed with  model.recon_loss()  (binary cross-entropy loss) and  model.kl_loss()  (KL divergence). The decoder is implicitly called to calculate the  cross-entropy loss: 
def train():
    model.train()
    optimizer.zero_grad()
    z = model.encode(train_data.x, train_data.edge_index)
    loss = model.recon_loss(z, train_data.pos_edge_label_index) + (1 / train_data.num_nodes) * model.kl_loss()
    loss.backward()
    optimizer.step()
    return float(loss) 
 The  test()  function  simply calls the VGAE's  dedicated method: 
@torch.no_grad()
def test(data):
    model.eval()
    z = model.encode(data.x, data.edge_index)
    return model.test(z, data.pos_edge_label_index, data.neg_edge_label_index) 
 We train this model for 301 epochs and print the two built-in metrics – the AUC and  the AP: 
for epoch in range(301):
    loss = train()
    val_auc, val_ap = test(val_data)
    if epoch % 50 == 0:
        print(f'Epoch {epoch:>2} | Loss: {loss:.4f} | Val AUC: {val_auc:.4f} | Val AP: {val_ap:.4f}') 
 We  obtain the  following output: 
 Epoch 0 | Loss: 3.4210 | Val AUC: 0.6772 | Val AP: 0.7110 
 Epoch 50 | Loss: 1.3324 | Val AUC: 0.6593 | Val AP: 0.6922 
 Epoch 100 | Loss: 1.1675 | Val AUC: 0.7366 | Val AP: 0.7298 
 Epoch 150 | Loss: 1.1166 | Val AUC: 0.7480 | Val AP: 0.7514 
 Epoch 200 | Loss: 1.0074 | Val AUC: 0.8390 | Val AP: 0.8395 
 Epoch 250 | Loss: 0.9541 | Val AUC: 0.8794 | Val AP: 0.8797 
 Epoch 300 | Loss: 0.9509 | Val AUC: 0.8833 | Val AP: 0.8845 
 We evaluate our model on the  test set: 
test_auc, test_ap = test(test_data)
print(f'Test AUC: {test_auc:.4f} | Test AP {test_ap:.4f}')
 Test AUC: 0.8833 | Test AP 0.8845 
 Finally, we can manually calculate the approximated adjacency  matrix,  : 
z = model.encode(test_data.x, test_data.edge_index)
Ahat = torch.sigmoid(z @ z.T)
 tensor([[0.8846, 0.5068, ..., 0.5160, 0.8309, 0.8378], 
         [0.5068, 0.8741, ..., 0.3900, 0.5367, 0.5495], 
         [0.7074, 0.7878, ..., 0.4318, 0.7806, 0.7602], 
         ..., 
         [0.5160, 0.3900, ..., 0.5855, 0.5350, 0.5176], 
         [0.8309, 0.5367, ..., 0.5350, 0.8443, 0.8275], 
         [0.8378, 0.5495, ..., 0.5176, 0.8275, 0.8200] 
   ], device='cuda:0', grad_fn=<SigmoidBackward0>) 
 
 Training  a VGAE is fast and  outputs results that are easily understandable. However, we saw that the GCN is not the most expressive operator. In order to improve the model’s expressiveness, we need to incorporate  better techniques. 
 Predicting links with SEAL 
 The  previous section introduced node-based methods, which learn relevant node embeddings to compute link likelihoods. Another approach consists of looking at the local neighborhood around the target nodes. These techniques are called subgraph-based algorithms and were popularized by  SEAL  (which could be said to stand for  Subgraphs, Embeddings, and Attributes for Link prediction  – though not always!). In this section, we will describe the SEAL framework and implement it using  PyTorch Geometric. 
 Introducing the SEAL framework 
 Introduced  in 2018 by Zhang and Chen [6], SEAL is a framework that learns graph structure features for link prediction. It defines the subgraph formed by the target nodes   and their  -hop neighbors  as the  enclosing subgraph . Each enclosing subgraph is used as input (instead of the entire graph) to predict a link likelihood. Another way to look at it is that SEAL automatically learns a local heuristic for  link prediction. 
 The framework involves  three steps: 
 
 Enclosing subgraph extraction , which  consists of taking a set of real links and a set of fake links (negative sampling) to form the  training data. 
 Node information matrix construction , which involves three components – node labels, node  embeddings, and  node features. 
 GNN training , which  takes the node information matrices as input and outputs  link likelihoods. 
 
 These steps are summarized in the  following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 10.3 – The SEAL framework 
 The enclosing subgraph extraction is a straightforward process. It consists of listing the target nodes and their  -hop neighbors to extract their edges and features. A high   will improve the quality of the heuristics SEAL can learn, but it also creates larger subgraphs that are more  computationally expensive. 
 The  first component of the node information construction is node labeling. This process assigns a specific number to each node. Without it, the GNN would be unable to differentiate between target and contextual nodes (their neighbors). It also embeds distances, which describe nodes’ relative positions and  structural importance. 
 In practice, the target nodes,   and  , must share a unique label to identify them as target nodes. For contextual nodes,   and  , they must share the same label if they have the same distance as the target nodes –   and  . We call this distance the double radius, noted  as  . 
 Different solutions can be considered, but SEAL’s authors propose the  Double-Radius Node Labeling  ( DRNL ) algorithm. It  works  as follows: 
 
 First, assign label 1 to    and  . 
 Assign label 1 to nodes with a radius –  . 
 Assign label 3 to nodes with a radius –    or  . 
 Assign  label 4 to nodes with a radius –  ,  , and  so on. 
 
 The  DRNL function can be written  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,  , and   and   are the integer quotient and remainder of   divided by 2 respectively. Finally, these node labels are  one-hot encoded. 
 Note 
 The two other components are easier to obtain. The node embeddings are optional but can be calculated using another algorithm, such as  Node2Vec . Then, they are concatenated with the node features and one-hot encoded labels to build the final node  information matrix. 
 Finally, a GNN  is trained to predict links, using enclosing subgraphs’ information and adjacency matrices. For this task, SEAL’s authors chose the  Deep Graph Convolutional Neural Network  ( DGCNN ) [7]. This  architecture performs  three steps: 
 
 Several GCN layers compute node embeddings that are then concatenated (like  a GIN). 
 A global sort pooling layer sorts these embeddings in a consistent order before feeding them into convolutional layers, which are  not permutation-invariant. 
 Traditional convolutional and dense layers are applied to the sorted graph representations and output a  link probability. 
 
 The DGCNN model is trained using the binary cross-entropy loss and outputs probabilities between  0   and  1 . 
 Implementing the SEAL framework 
 The SEAL framework  requires extensive preprocessing to extract and label the enclosing subgraphs. Let’s implement it using  PyTorch Geometric: 
 
 First, we import all the  necessary libraries: 
import numpy as np
from sklearn.metrics import roc_auc_score, average_precision_score
from scipy.sparse.csgraph import shortest_path
import torch
import torch.nn.functional as F
from torch.nn import Conv1d, MaxPool1d, Linear, Dropout, BCEWithLogitsLoss
from torch_geometric.datasets import Planetoid
from torch_geometric.transforms import RandomLinkSplit
from torch_geometric.data import Data
from torch_geometric.loader import DataLoader
from torch_geometric.nn import GCNConv, aggr
from torch_geometric.utils import k_hop_subgraph, to_scipy_sparse_matrix 
 We load  the  Cora  dataset and apply a link-level random split, like in the  previous section: 
transform = RandomLinkSplit(num_val=0.05, num_test=0.1, is_undirected=True, split_labels=True)
dataset = Planetoid('.', name='Cora', transform=transform)
train_data, val_data, test_data = dataset[0] 
 The link-level random split creates new fields in the  Data  object to store the labels and index of each positive (real) and negative ( fake) edge: 
train_data
 Data(x=[2708, 1433], edge_index=[2, 8976], y=[2708], train_mask=[2708], val_mask=[2708], test_mask=[2708], pos_edge_label=[4488], pos_edge_label_index=[2, 4488], neg_edge_label=[4488], neg_edge_label_index=[2, 4488]) 
 We create a function to process each split and obtain enclosing subgraphs with one-hot encoded node labels and node features. We declare a list to store  these subgraphs: 
def seal_processing(dataset, edge_label_index, y):
    data_list = [] 
 For each (source and destination) pair in the dataset, we extract the k-hop neighbors ( here,  ): 
    for src, dst in edge_label_index.t().tolist():
        sub_nodes, sub_edge_index, mapping, _ = k_hop_subgraph([src, dst], 2, dataset.edge_index, relabel_nodes=True)
        src, dst = mapping.tolist() 
 We  calculate the distances using the DRNL function. First, we remove the target nodes from  the subgraph: 
        mask1 = (sub_edge_index[0] != src) | (sub_edge_index[1] != dst)
        mask2 = (sub_edge_index[0] != dst) | (sub_edge_index[1] != src)
        sub_edge_index = sub_edge_index[:, mask1 & mask2] 
 We compute the adjacency matrices for source and destination nodes based on the  previous subgraph: 
        src, dst = (dst, src) if src > dst else (src, dst)
        adj = to_scipy_sparse_matrix(sub_edge_index, num_nodes=sub_nodes.size(0)).tocsr()
        idx = list(range(src)) + list(range(src + 1, adj.shape[0]))
        adj_wo_src = adj[idx, :][:, idx]
        idx = list(range(dst)) + list(range(dst + 1, adj.shape[0]))
        adj_wo_dst = adj[idx, :][:, idx] 
 We  calculate the distance between every node and the source/destination  target node: 
        d_src = shortest_path(adj_wo_dst, directed=False, unweighted=True, indices=src)
        d_src = np.insert(d_src, dst, 0, axis=0)
        d_src = torch.from_numpy(d_src)
        d_dst = shortest_path(adj_wo_src, directed=False, unweighted=True, indices=dst-1)
        d_dst = np.insert(d_dst, src, 0, axis=0)
        d_dst = torch.from_numpy(d_dst) 
 We calculate the node labels,  z , for every node in  the subgraph: 
        dist = d_src + d_dst
        z = 1 + torch.min(d_src, d_dst) + dist // 2 * (dist // 2 + dist % 2 - 1)
        z[src], z[dst], z[torch.isnan(z)] = 1., 1., 0.
        z = z.to(torch.long) 
 In this example, we will not use node embeddings, but we still concatenate features and one-hot-encoded labels to build the node  information matrix: 
        node_labels = F.one_hot(z, num_classes=200).to(torch.float)
        node_emb = dataset.x[sub_nodes]
        node_x = torch.cat([node_emb, node_labels], dim=1) 
 We  create a  Data  object and append it to the list, which is the final output of  this function: 
        data = Data(x=node_x, z=z, edge_index=sub_edge_index, y=y)
        data_list.append(data)
    return data_list 
 Let’s use it to extract enclosing subgraphs for each dataset. We separate positive and negative examples to get the correct label  to predict: 
train_pos_data_list = seal_processing(train_data, train_data.pos_edge_label_index, 1)
train_neg_data_list = seal_processing(train_data, train_data.neg_edge_label_index, 0)
val_pos_data_list = seal_processing(val_data, val_data.pos_edge_label_index, 1)
val_neg_data_list = seal_processing(val_data, val_data.neg_edge_label_index, 0)
test_pos_data_list = seal_processing(test_data, test_data.pos_edge_label_index, 1)
test_neg_data_list = seal_processing(test_data, test_data.neg_edge_label_index, 0) 
 Next, we merge positive and negative data lists to reconstruct the training, validation, and  test datasets: 
train_dataset = train_pos_data_list + train_neg_data_list
val_dataset = val_pos_data_list + val_neg_data_list
test_dataset = test_pos_data_list + test_neg_data_list 
 We  create data loaders to train the GNN  using batches: 
train_loader = DataLoader(train_dataset, batch_size=32, shuffle=True)
val_loader = DataLoader(val_dataset, batch_size=32)
test_loader = DataLoader(test_dataset, batch_size=32) 
 We create a new class for the DGCNN model. The  k  parameter represents the number of nodes to hold for  each subgraph: 
class DGCNN(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_in, k=30):
        super().__init__() 
 We create four GCN layers with a fixed hidden dimension  of 32: 
        self.gcn1 = GCNConv(dim_in, 32)
        self.gcn2 = GCNConv(32, 32)
        self.gcn3 = GCNConv(32, 32)
        self.gcn4 = GCNConv(32, 1) 
 We instantiate the global sort pooling at the core of the  DGCNN architecture: 
        self.global_pool = aggr.SortAggregation(k=k) 
 The node ordering provided by global pooling allows us to use traditional  convolutional layers: 
        self.conv1 = Conv1d(1, 16, 97, 97)
        self.conv2 = Conv1d(16, 32, 5, 1)
        self.maxpool = MaxPool1d(2, 2) 
 Finally, the prediction is managed by  an MLP: 
        self.linear1 = Linear(352, 128)
        self.dropout = Dropout(0.5)
        self.linear2 = Linear(128, 1) 
 In  the  forward()  function, we calculate node embeddings for each GCN and concatenate  the results: 
    def forward(self, x, edge_index, batch):
        h1 = self.gcn1(x, edge_index).tanh()
        h2 = self.gcn2(h1, edge_index).tanh()
        h3 = self.gcn3(h2, edge_index).tanh()
        h4 = self.gcn4(h3, edge_index).tanh()
        h = torch.cat([h1, h2, h3, h4], dim=-1) 
 The global sort pooling, convolutional layers, and dense layers are sequentially applied to  this result: 
        h = self.global_pool(h, batch)
        h = h.view(h.size(0), 1, h.size(-1))
        h = self.conv1(h).relu()
        h = self.maxpool(h)
        h = self.conv2(h).relu()
        h = h.view(h.size(0), -1)
        h = self.linear1(h).relu()
        h = self.dropout(h)
        h = self.linear2(h).sigmoid()
        return h 
 We  instantiate the model on a GPU if available, and train it using the  Adam  optimizer and the binary  cross-entropy loss: 
device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
model = DGCNN(train_dataset[0].num_features).to(device)
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(params=model.parameters(), lr=0.0001)
criterion = BCEWithLogitsLoss() 
 We create a traditional  train()  function for  batch training: 
def train():
    model.train()
    total_loss = 0
    for data in train_loader:
        data = data.to(device)
        optimizer.zero_grad()
        out = model(data.x, data.edge_index, data.batch)
        loss = criterion(out.view(-1), data.y.to(torch.float))
        loss.backward()
        optimizer.step()
        total_loss += float(loss) * data.num_graphs
    return total_loss / len(train_dataset) 
 In the  test()  function, we calculate the ROC AUC score and the average precision  to compare the SEAL performance with the  VGAE performance: 
@torch.no_grad()
def test(loader):
    model.eval()
    y_pred, y_true = [], []
    for data in loader:
        data = data.to(device)
        out = model(data.x, data.edge_index, data.batch)
        y_pred.append(out.view(-1).cpu())
        y_true.append(data.y.view(-1).cpu().to(torch.float))
    auc = roc_auc_score(torch.cat(y_true), torch.cat(y_pred))
    ap = average_precision_score(torch.cat(y_true), torch.cat(y_pred))
    return auc, ap 
 We train the DGCNN for  31 epochs: 
for epoch in range(31):
    loss = train()
    val_auc, val_ap = test(val_loader)
    print(f'Epoch {epoch:>2} | Loss: {loss:.4f} | Val AUC: {val_auc:.4f} | Val AP: {val_ap:.4f}')
 Epoch 0 | Loss: 0.6925 | Val AUC: 0.8215 | Val AP: 0.8357 
 Epoch 1 | Loss: 0.6203 | Val AUC: 0.8543 | Val AP: 0.8712 
 Epoch 2 | Loss: 0.5888 | Val AUC: 0.8783 | Val AP: 0.8877... 
 Epoch 29 | Loss: 0.5461 | Val AUC: 0.8991 | Val AP: 0.8973 
 Epoch 30 | Loss: 0.5460 | Val AUC: 0.9005 | Val AP: 0.8992 
 Finally, we  test it on the  test dataset: 
test_auc, test_ap = test(test_loader)
print(f'Test AUC: {test_auc:.4f} | Test AP {test_ap:.4f}')
 Test AUC: 0.8808 | Test AP 0.8863 
 
 We obtain results that are similar to those observed using the VGAE (test AUC –  0.8833  and test AP –  0.8845 ). In theory, subgraph-based methods such as SEAL are more expressive than node-based methods such as VGAEs. They capture more information by explicitly considering the entire neighborhood around target nodes. SEAL’s accuracy can also be improved by increasing the number of neighbors taken into account with the  k  parameter. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we explored a new task with link prediction. We gave an overview of this field by presenting heuristic and matrix factorization techniques. Heuristics can be classified according to the k-hop neighbors they consider – from local with 1-hop neighbors to global with the knowledge of the entire graph. Conversely, matrix factorization approximates the adjacency matrix using node embeddings. We also explained how this technique was connected to algorithms described in previous chapters ( DeepWalk   and  Node2Vec ). 
 After this introduction to link prediction, we saw how to implement it using GNNs. We outlined two kinds of techniques, based on node embeddings (GAE and VGAE) and subgraph representations (SEAL). Finally, we implemented a VGAE and SEAL on the  Cora  dataset with an edge-level random split and negative sampling. Both models obtained comparable performance, although SEAL is strictly  more expressive. 
 In  Chapter 11 , Generating Graphs with Graph Neural Networks , we will see different strategies to produce realistic graphs. First, we will describe traditional techniques with the popular Erdős–Rényi model. Then, we will see how deep generative methods work by reusing the GVAE and introducing a new architecture – the  Graph Recurrent Neural  Network  ( GraphRNN ). 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] H. Tong, C. Faloutsos and J. -y. Pan. “Fast Random Walk with Restart and Its Applications” in  Sixth International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM’06) , 2006, pp. 613-622,  doi: 10.1109/ICDM.2006.70. 
 [2] Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and Chris Volinsky. 2009.  Matrix Factorization Techniques for Recommender Systems.  Computer 42, 8 (August 2009),  30–37. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2009.263. 
 [3] J. Qiu, Y. Dong, H. Ma, J. Li, K. Wang, and J. Tang.  Network Embedding as Matrix Factorization . Feb. 2018.  doi: 10.1145/3159652.3159706. 
 [4] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling.  Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes.  arXiv, 2013.  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1312.6114. 
 [5] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling.  Variational Graph Auto-Encoders . arXiv, 2016.  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1611.07308. 
 [6] M. Zhang and Y. Chen.  Link Prediction Based on Graph Neural Networks . arXiv, 2018.  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1802.09691. 
 [7] Muhan Zhang, Zhicheng Cui, Marion Neumann, and Yixin Chen. 2018.  An end-to-end deep learning architecture for graph classification . In  Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence  and  Thirtieth Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference  and  Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence  (AAAI’18/IAAI’18/EAAI’18). AAAI Press, Article  544, 4438–4445. 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 11 
 Generating Graphs Using Graph Neural Networks 
 Graph generation consists of finding methods to create new graphs. As a field of study, it provides insights into understanding how graphs work and evolve. It also has direct applications in data augmentation, anomaly detection, drug discovery, and so on. We can distinguish two types of  generation:  realistic graph generation , which imitates a given graph (for example, in data augmentation), and  goal-directed graph generation , which  creates graphs that optimize a specific metric (for instance, in  molecule generation). 
 In this chapter, we will explore traditional techniques to understand how graph generation works. We will focus on two popular algorithms: the  Erdős–Rényi  and the  small-world  models. They present interesting properties but also issues that motivate the need for GNN-based graph generation. In the second section, we will describe three families of solutions:  variational autoencoder  ( VAE )-based, autoregressive, and  GAN -based models. Finally, we will implement a GAN-based framework with  Reinforcement Learning  ( RL ) to generate new chemical compounds. Instead of PyTorch Geometric, we will use the  DeepChem  library  with TensorFlow. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will be able to generate graphs using traditional and GNN-based techniques. You will have a good overview of this field and the different applications you can build with it. You will know how to implement a hybrid architecture to guide the generation into generating valid molecules with your  desired properties. 
 In this chapter, we will cover the following  main topics: 
 
 Generating graphs with  traditional techniques 
 Generating graphs with graph  neural networks 
 Generating molecules  with MolGAN 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter11 . 
 Installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  of  this book. 
 Generating graphs with traditional techniques 
 Traditional graph  generation techniques have been studied for decades. This is why they are well understood and can be used as  baselines in various applications. However, they are often limited in the type of graphs they can generate. Most of them are specialized to output certain topologies, which is why they cannot simply imitate a  given network. 
 In this section, we will introduce two classical techniques: the Erdős–Rényi and the  small-world models. 
 The Erdős–Rényi model 
 The  Erdős–Rényi model is the  simplest and most popular random graph model. It was introduced by Hungarian mathematicians Paul Erdős and Alfréd Rényi in 1959 [1] and was independently proposed by Edgar Gilbert the same year [2]. This model has two variants:    and  . 
 The   model is straightforward: we are given   nodes and a probability   of connecting a pair of nodes. We try to randomly connect every node to each other to create the final graph. It means that there are   possible links. Another way of understanding the probability   is to consider it as a parameter to change the density of  the network. 
 The  networkx  library  has a  direct implementation of the    model: 
 
 We import the  networkx  library: 
import networkx as nx
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt 
 We generate a  G  graph using the  nx.erdos_renyi_graph()  function with  10  nodes ( ) and a probability for edge creation of  0.5  ( ): 
G = nx.erdos_renyi_graph(10, 0.5, seed=0) 
 We position the resulting nodes using the  nx.circular_layout()  function. Other layouts can be used, but this one is handy for comparing different values  of  : 
pos = nx.circular_layout(G) 
 We  draw the  G  graph with the  pos  layout using  nx.draw() . Global heuristics are usually more accurate  but require knowing the entirety of the graph. However, it is not the only way to predict links with  this knowledge: 
nx.draw(G, pos=pos, with_labels=True) 
 
 This gives us the  following graph: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11.1 – An Erdős–Rényi graph with 10 nodes and p=0.5 
 We can repeat this process with a probability of  0.1  and  0.9  to obtain the  following diagram: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11.2 – Erdős–Rényi graphs with different probabilities for edge creation 
 We can  see that many nodes are  isolated when   is low, while the graph is highly interconnected when    is high. 
 In the   model, we randomly choose a graph from all graphs with   nodes and   links. For instance, if   and  , there are three possible graphs (see  Figure 11 .3 ). The   model will just randomly select one of these graphs. This is a different approach to the same problem, but it is not as popular as the   model because it is more challenging to analyze  in general: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11.3 – A set of graphs with three nodes and two links 
 We  can  also implement the   model in Python using the  nx.gnm_random_graph()  function: 
 
G = nx.gnm_random_graph(3, 2, seed=0)
pos = nx.circular_layout(G)
nx.draw(G, pos=pos, with_labels=True) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11.4 – A graph randomly sampled from the set of graphs with three nodes and two links 
 The strongest and most interesting assumption made by the   model is that links are independent (meaning that they do not interfere with each other). Unfortunately, it is not true  for most real-world graphs, where  we observe clusters and communities that contradict  this rule. 
 The small-world model 
 Introduced  in 1998 by Duncan Watts and Steven Strogatz [3], the small-world model tries to imitate the behavior of  biological, technological, and social networks. The main concept is that real-world networks are not completely random (as in the Erdős–Rényi model) but not totally regular either (as in a grid). This kind of topology is somewhere in between, which is why we can interpolate it using a coefficient. The small-world model produces graphs that  have both: 
 
 Short paths : The average  distance between any two nodes in the network is relatively small, which makes it easy for information to spread quickly throughout  the network 
 High clustering coefficients : Nodes  in the network tend to be closely connected to one another, creating dense clusters  of nodes 
 
 Many  algorithms  display small-world properties. In the following, we will describe the original  Watts–Strogatz  model proposed in [3]. It can be implemented using the  following steps: 
 
 We initialize a graph with    nodes. 
 Each node is connected to its   nearest neighbors (or   neighbors if    is odd). 
 Each  link between nodes   and   has a probability   of being rewired between   and  , where   is another  random node. 
 
 In Python, we can implement it by calling the  nx.watts_strogatz_graph()  function: 
 
G = nx.watts_strogatz_graph(10, 4, 0.5, seed=0)
pos = nx.circular_layout(G)
nx.draw(G, pos=pos) 
 This produces the  following graph: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11.5 – A small-world network obtained with the Watts–Strogatz model 
 As with the Erdős–Rényi model, we can  repeat the same process with different probabilities   to obtain  Figure 11 .6 : 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11.6 – A small-world model with different probabilities for rewiring 
 We can see that when  , the graph is completely regular. On the opposite end, when  , the graph  is completely random as every link has been rewired. We obtain a balanced graph between these two extremes with hubs and  local clustering. 
 Nonetheless, the  Watts–Strogatz model does not produce a realistic degree distribution. It also requires a fixed number of nodes, which means it cannot be used for network growth. In general, classical methods fail to capture real-world graphs’ full diversity and complexity. This motivated the creation of a new family of techniques, often referred to as deep  graph generation. 
 Generating graphs with graph neural networks 
 Deep graph generative  models are GNN-based architectures that are more expressive than traditional techniques. However, it comes at a cost: they are often too complex to be analyzed and understood, like classical methods. We list three main families of architecture for deep graph generation: VAEs, GANs, and autoregressive models. Other techniques exist, such as normalizing flows or diffusion models, but they are less popular and mature than  these three. 
 This section will describe how to use VAEs, GANs, and autoregressive models to  generate graphs. 
 Graph variational autoencoders 
 As seen in the last chapter, VAEs can  be used to approximate an adjacency matrix. The  Graph Variational Autoencoder  ( GVAE ) model we  saw has two components: an encoder and a decoder. The encoder uses two GCNs that share their first layer to learn the mean and the variance of each latent normal distribution. The decoder then samples the learned distributions to perform the inner product between latent variables  . In the end, we obtained the approximated adjacency  matrix  . 
 In the previous chapter, we used   to predict links. However, it is not its only application: it directly gives us the adjacency matrix of a network that imitates graphs seen  during training. Instead of predicting links, we can use this output to generate new graphs. Here is  an example of the adjacency matrix created by the VGAE model from  Chapter 10 : 
 
z = model.encode(test_data.x, test_data.edge_index)
adj = torch.where((z @ z.T) > 0.9, 1, 0)
adj
 tensor([[1, 0, 0,  ..., 0, 1, 1], 
         [0, 1, 1,  ..., 0, 0, 0], 
         [0, 1, 1,  ..., 0, 1, 1], 
         ..., 
         [0, 0, 0,  ..., 1, 0, 0], 
         [1, 0, 1,  ..., 0, 1, 1], 
         [1, 0, 1,  ..., 0, 1, 1]]) 
 Since 2016, this technique has been expanded beyond the GVAE model to also output node and edge features. A good example  is one of the most popular VAE-based graph generative models:  GraphVAE  [4]. Introduced in 2018 by Simonovsky and Komodakis, it is designed to generate realistic molecules. This requires the ability to differentiate nodes (atoms) and edges ( chemical bonds). 
 GraphVAE considers graphs  , where   is the adjacency matrix,   is the edge attribute tensor, and   is the node attribute matrix. It learns a probabilistic version of the graph   with a predefined number of nodes. In this probabilistic version,   contains node ( ) and edge ( ) probabilities,   indicates class probabilities for  edges, and   contains class probabilities for nodes. Compared to GVAE, GraphVAE’s encoder is a feed forward network  with  edge-conditional graph convolutions  ( ECC ), and its decoder is a  multilayer perceptron  ( MLP ) with  three outputs. The entire architecture is summarized in the  following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11.7 – GraphVAE’s inference process 
 There are  many other VAE-based graph generative architectures. However, their role is not limited to imitating graphs: they can also embed constraints to guide the type of graphs  they produce. 
 A popular  way of adding these constraints is to check them during the decoding phase, such as the  Constrained Graph Variational Autoencoder  ( CGVAE ) [5]. In  this architecture, the encoder is a  Gated Graph Convolutional Network  ( GGCN ), and  the decoder is an autoregressive model. Autoregressive decoders are particularly suited for this task, as  they can verify every constraint for each step of the process. Finally, another technique to add constraints consists of using Lagrangian-based regularizers that are faster to compute but less strict in terms of  generation [6]. 
 Autoregressive models 
 Autoregressive models  can also be used  on their own. The difference with other models is that past outputs become part of the current input. In this framework, graph generation becomes a sequential decision-making process that considers both data and past decisions. For instance, at each step, the autoregressive model can create a new node or a new link. Then, the resulting graph is fed to the model for the next generation step until we stop it. The following diagram illustrates  this process: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11.8 – The autoregressive process for graph generation 
 In practice, we  use  Recurrent Neural Networks  ( RNNs ) to implement this autoregressive ability. In this architecture, previous outputs are used as inputs to compute the current hidden state. In addition, they can process inputs of arbitrary length, which is crucial for generating graphs iteratively. However, this computation is slower than feedforward networks, as the entire sequence must be processed to obtain the final output. The two most popular types of RNNs  are  the  Gated Recurrent Unit  ( GRU ) and  Long Short-Term Memory  ( LSTM ) networks. 
 Introduced in 2018 by You et al.,  GraphRNN  [7] is a  direct implementation of these techniques for deep graph generation. This architecture uses  two RNNs: 
 
 A  graph-level RNN  to  generate a sequence of nodes (including the  initial state) 
 An  edge-level RNN  to  predict connections for each newly  added node 
 
 The edge-level  RNN takes the hidden state of the graph-level RNN as input and then feeds it  with its own output. This mechanism is illustrated in the following diagram at  inference time: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11.9 – GraphRNN’s architecture at inference time 
 Both RNNs are actually completing an adjacency matrix: each new node created by the graph-level RNN adds a row and a column, which are filled with zeros and ones by the edge-level RNN. In summary, GraphRNN performs the  following steps: 
 
 Add new node : The graph-level RNN initializes the graph and its output if fed to the  edge-level RNN. 
 Add new connections : The edge-level RNN predicts if the new node is connected to each of the  previous nodes. 
 Stop graph generation : The two first steps are repeated until the edge-level RNN outputs an EOS token, marking the end of  the process. 
 
 The  GraphRNN  can  learn different types of graphs (grids, social networks, proteins, and so on) and completely outperform traditional techniques. It is an architecture of choice to imitate given graphs that should be preferred  to GraphVAE. 
 Generative adversarial networks 
 Like VAEs, GANs  are a  well-known generative model in  ML . In this framework, two neural networks compete in a zero-sum game with two different goals. The first neural network is a generator that creates new data, and the second one is a discriminator that classifies each sample as real (from the training set) or fake (made by  the generator). 
 Over the years, two main improvements to the original architecture have been proposed. The first one is called  the  Wasserstein GAN  ( WGAN ). It improves learning stability by minimizing the Wasserstein distance (or Earth Mover’s distance) between two probability distributions. This variant is further refined by introducing a gradient penalty instead of the original gradient  clipping scheme. 
 Multiple works applied this framework to deep graph generation. Like previous techniques, GANs can imitate graphs or generate networks that optimize certain constraints. The latter option is handy in applications such as finding new chemical compounds with specific properties. This problem is exceptionally vast (over   possible combinations) and complex due to its  discrete nature. 
 Proposed by De Cao and Kipf in 2018 [8], the  molecular GAN  ( MolGAN ) is a popular solution to this  problem. It combines a WGAN with a gradient penalty that directly processes graph-structured data and an RL objective to generate molecules with desired chemical properties. This  RL objective is  based on the  Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient  ( DDPG ) algorithm, an off-policy actor-critic model that uses deterministic policy gradients. MolGAN’s architecture is summarized in the  following diagram: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11.10 – MolGAN’s architecture at inference time 
 This framework is  divided into three  main components: 
 
 The  generator  is an  MLP that outputs a node matrix   containing the atom types and an adjacency matrix  , which is actually a tensor containing both the edges and bond types. The generator is trained using a linear combination of the WGAN and RL loss. We  translate these dense representations into sparse objects (  and  ) via  categorical sampling. 
 The  discriminator  receives  graphs from the generator and the dataset and learns to distinguish them. It is solely trained using the  WGAN loss. 
 The  reward network  scores  each graph. It is trained using the MSE loss based on the real score provided by an external system (RDKit in  this case). 
 
 The discriminator and the reward network use the GNN mode: the Relational-GCN, a GCN variant that supports multiple edge types. After several layers of graph convolutions, node embeddings are aggregated into a graph-level  vector output: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   denotes the logistic sigmoid function,   and   are two MLPs with linear output, and   is  the element-wise multiplication. A third MLP further processes this graph embedding to produce a value between 0 and 1 for the reward network and between   and   for  the discriminator. 
 MolGAN  produces valid chemical compounds that optimize properties such as drug likeliness, synthesizability, and solubility. We will implement this architecture in the next section to generate  new molecules. 
 Generating molecules with MolGAN 
 Deep graph  generation is not well covered by PyTorch Geometric. Drug discovery is the main application of this subfield, which is why generative models can be found in specialized libraries. More specifically, there are two popular Python libraries for ML-based drug discovery:  DeepChem  and  torchdrug . In this section, we will use DeepChem as it is more mature and directly  implements  MolGAN. 
 Let’s see how we can use it with  DeepChem  and  tensorflow . The following procedure is based on  DeepChem’s example: 
 
 We install  DeepChem  ( https://deepchem.io ), which requires the following libraries:  tensorflow ,  joblib ,  NumPy ,  pandas ,  scikit-learn ,  SciPy ,  and  rdkit : 
!pip install deepchem==2.7.1 
 Then, we import the  required packages: 
import numpy as np
import tensorflow as tf
import pandas as pd
from tensorflow import one_hot
import deepchem as dc
from deepchem.models.optimizers import ExponentialDecay
from deepchem.models import BasicMolGANModel as MolGAN
from deepchem.feat.molecule_featurizers.molgan_featurizer import GraphMatrix
from rdkit import Chem
from rdkit.Chem import Draw
from rdkit.Chem import rdmolfiles
from rdkit.Chem import rdmolops
from rdkit.Chem.Draw import IpythonConsole 
 We  download the  tox21  ( Toxicology in the 21st Century ) dataset, which comprises over 6,000 chemical  compounds, to analyze their toxicity. We only need their  simplified molecular-input line-entry system  ( SMILES ) representations  in  this example: 
_, datasets, _ = dc.molnet.load_tox21()
df = pd.DataFrame(datasets[0].ids, columns=['smiles']) 
 Here is an output of these  smiles  strings: 
 0  CC(O)(P(=O)(O)O)P(=O)(O)O 
 1  CC(C)(C)OOC(C)(C)CCC(C)(C)OOC(C)(C)C 
 2  OC[C@H](O)[C@@H](O)[C@H](O)CO 
 3  CCCCCCCC(=O)[O-].CCCCCCCC(=O)[O-].[Zn+2] 
 ... ... 
 6260 Cc1cc(CCCOc2c(C)cc(-c3noc(C(F)(F)F)n3)cc2C)on1 
 6261 O=C1OC(OC(=O)c2cccnc2Nc2cccc(C(F)(F)F)c2)c2ccc... 
 6262 CC(=O)C1(C)CC2=C(CCCC2(C)C)CC1C 
 6263 CC(C)CCC[C@@H](C)[C@H]1CC(=O)C2=C3CC[C@H]4C[C@... 
 We only consider molecules with a maximum number of 15 atoms. We filter our dataset and create a  featurizer  to convert the  smiles  strings into  input features: 
max_atom = 15
molecules = [x for x in df['smiles'].values if Chem.MolFromSmiles(x).GetNumAtoms() < max_atom]
featurizer = dc.feat.MolGanFeaturizer(max_atom_count=max_atom) 
 We  manually loop through our dataset  to convert the  smiles  strings: 
features = []
for x in molecules:
    mol = Chem.MolFromSmiles(x)
    new_order = rdmolfiles.CanonicalRankAtoms(mol)
    mol = rdmolops.RenumberAtoms(mol, new_order)
    feature = featurizer.featurize(mol)
    if feature.size != 0:
        features.append(feature[0]) 
 We remove invalid molecules from  the dataset: 
features = [x for x in features if type(x) is GraphMatrix] 
 Then, we create the  MolGAN  model. It will be trained with a learning rate that has an exponential  delay schedule: 
gan = MolGAN(learning_rate=ExponentialDecay(0.001, 0.9, 5000), vertices=max_atom) 
 We create the dataset to feed to  MolGAN  in  DeepChem’s format: 
dataset = dc.data.NumpyDataset(X=[x.adjacency_matrix for x in features], y=[x.node_features for x in features]) 
 MolGAN  uses  batch training, which is why we need to define an iterable  as follows: 
def iterbatches(epochs):
    for i in range(epochs):
        for batch in dataset.iterbatches(batch_size=gan.batch_size, pad_batches=True):
            adjacency_tensor = one_hot(batch[0], gan.edges)
            node_tensor = one_hot(batch[1], gan.nodes)
            yield {gan.data_inputs[0]: adjacency_tensor, gan.data_inputs[1]: node_tensor} 
 We train  the model for  25  epochs: 
gan.fit_gan(iterbatches(25), generator_steps=0.2) 
 We generate  1000  molecules: 
generated_data = gan.predict_gan_generator(1000)
nmols = feat.defeaturize(generated_data) 
 Then, we check whether these molecules are valid  or not: 
valid_mols = [x for x in generated_mols if x is not None]
print (f'{len(valid_mols)} valid molecules (out of {len((generated_mols))} generated molecules)')
 31 valid molecules (out of 1000 generated molecules) 
 We compare them to see how many molecules  are unique: 
generated_smiles = [Chem.MolToSmiles(x) for x in valid_mols]
generated_smiles_viz = [Chem.MolFromSmiles(x) for x in set(generated_smiles)]
print(f'{len(generated_smiles_viz)} unique valid molecules ({len(generated_smiles)-len(generated_smiles_viz)} redundant molecules)')
 24 unique valid molecules (7 redundant molecules) 
 We  print  the generated molecules in  a grid: 
img = Draw.MolsToGridImage(generated_smiles_viz, molsPerRow=6, subImgSize=(200, 200), returnPNG=False) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11.11 – Molecules generated with MolGAN 
 Despite the  GAN’s improvements, this training process is quite unstable and can fail to produce any meaningful result. The code we presented is sensitive to hyperparameter changes and does  not generalize well to other datasets, including the  QM9  dataset used in the  original paper. 
 Nonetheless, MolGAN’s concept of mixing RL and GANs can be employed beyond drug discovery to optimize any type of graph, such as computer networks, recommender systems, and  so on. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we saw different techniques to generate graphs. First, we explored traditional methods based on probabilities with interesting mathematical properties. However, due to their lack of expressiveness, we switched to GNN-based techniques that are much more flexible. We covered three families of deep generative models: VAE-based, autoregressive, and GAN-based methods. We introduced a model from each family to understand how they work in  real life. 
 Finally, we implemented a GAN-based model that combines a generator, a discriminator, and a reward network from RL. Instead of simply imitating graphs seen during training, this architecture can also optimize desired properties such as solubility. We used DeepChem and TensorFlow to create 24 unique and valid molecules. Nowadays, this pipeline is common in the drug discovery industry, where ML can drastically speed up  drug development. 
 In  Chapter 12 ,  Handling Heterogeneous Graphs , we will explore a new kind of graph that we previously encountered in recommender systems and molecules. These heterogeneous graphs contain multiple types of nodes and/or links, which requires specific processing. They are more general than the regular graphs we talked about and particularly useful in applications such as  knowledge graphs. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] P. Erdös and A. Rényi.  On random graphs I , Publicationes Mathematicae Debrecen, vol. 6, p. 290, 1959. Available  at  https://snap.stanford.edu/class/cs224w-readings/erdos59random.pdf . 
 [2] E. N. Gilbert,  Random Graphs , The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1141–1144, 1959, DOI: 10.1214/aoms/1177706098. Available  at:  https://projecteuclid.org/journals/annals-of-mathematical-statistics/volume-30/issue-4/Random-Graphs/10.1214/aoms/1177706098.full . 
 [3] Duncan J. Watts and Steven H. Strogatz.  Collective dynamics of small-world networks , Nature, 393, pp. 440–442, 1998. Available  at  http://snap.stanford.edu/class/cs224w-readings/watts98smallworld.pdf . 
 [4] M. Simonovsky and N. Komodakis.  GraphVAE: Towards Generation of Small Graphs Using Variational Autoencoders  CoRR, vol. abs/1802.03480, 2018, [Online]. Available  at  http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03480 . 
 [5] Q. Liu, M. Allamanis, M. Brockschmidt, and A. L. Gaunt.  Constrained Graph Variational Autoencoders for Molecule Design . arXiv, 2018. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1805.09076. Available  at  https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.09076 . 
 [6] T. Ma, J. Chen, and C. Xiao, Constrained Generation of Semantically Valid Graphs via Regularizing Variational Autoencoders. arXiv, 2018. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1809.02630. Available  at  https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.02630 . 
 [7] J. You, R. Ying, X. Ren, W. L. Hamilton, and J. Leskovec.  GraphRNN: Generating Realistic Graphs with Deep Auto-regressive Models . arXiv, 2018. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1802.08773. Available  at  https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.08773 . 
 [8] N. De Cao and T. Kipf.  MolGAN: An implicit generative model for small molecular graphs . arXiv, 2018. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1805.11973. Available  at  https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.11973 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 12 
 Learning from Heterogeneous Graphs 
 In the previous chapter, we tried to generate realistic molecules that contain different types of nodes (atoms) and edges (bonds). We also observe this kind of behavior in other applications, such as recommender systems (users and items), social networks (followers and followees), or cybersecurity (routers and servers). We call these kinds of graphs  heterogeneous , as opposed to homogeneous graphs, which only involve one type of node and one type  of edge. 
 In this chapter, we will recap everything we know about homogeneous GNNs. We will introduce the message passing neural network framework to generalize the architectures we have seen so far. This summary will allow us to understand how to expand our framework to heterogeneous networks. We will start by creating our own heterogeneous dataset. Then, we will transform homogeneous architectures into  heterogeneous ones. 
 In the last section, we will take a different approach and discuss an architecture specifically designed to process heterogeneous networks. We will describe how it works to understand better the difference between this architecture and a classic GAT. Finally, we will implement it in PyTorch Geometric and compare our results with the  previous techniques. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will have a strong understanding of the differences between homogeneous and heterogeneous graphs. You will be able to create your own heterogeneous datasets and convert traditional models to use them in this context. You will also be able to implement architectures specifically designed to make the most of heterogeneous networks.  
 In this chapter, we will cover the following  main topics: 
 
 The message passing neural  network framework 
 Introducing  heterogeneous graphs 
 Transforming homogeneous GNNs to  heterogeneous GNNs 
 Implementing a hierarchical  self-attention network 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter12 . 
 The installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  of  this book. 
 The message passing neural network framework 
 Before exploring  heterogeneous graphs, let’s recap what we have learned about homogeneous GNNs. In the previous chapters, we saw different functions for aggregating and combining features from different nodes. As seen in  Chapter 5 , the simplest GNN layer consists of summing the linear combination of features from neighboring nodes (including the target node itself) with a weight matrix. The output of the previous sum then replaces the previous target  node embedding. 
 The node-level operator can be written  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
  is the set of neighboring nodes of the   node (including itself),   is the embedding of the   node, and   is a  weight matrix: 
 GCN and GAT layers added fixed and dynamic weights to node features but kept the same idea. Even GraphSAGE’s LSTM operator or GIN’s max aggregator did not change the main concept of a GNN layer. If we look at all these variants, we can generalize GNN layers into a common framework called the  Message Passing Neural Network  ( MPNN  or  MP-GNN ). Introduced in 2017 by Gilmer et al. [1], this framework consists of three  main operations: 
 
 Message : Every  node uses a function to create a message for each neighbor. It can simply consist of its own features (as in the previous example) or also consider the neighboring node’s features and  edge features. 
 Aggregate : Every node aggregates messages from its neighbors using a permutation-equivariant function, such as the sum in the  previous example. 
 Update : Every node updates its features using a function to combine its current features and the aggregated messages. In the previous example, we introduced a self-loop to aggregate the current features of the   node, such as  a neighbor. 
 
 These steps  can be summarized in a  single equation: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   is the node embedding of the   node,   is the edge embedding of the   link,   is the message function,   is the aggregation function, and   is the update function. You can find an illustrated version of this framework in the  following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 12.1 – The MPNN framework 
 PyTorch Geometric  directly implements this framework with the  MessagePassing  class. For instance, here is how to implement the GCN layer using  this class: 
 
 First, we import the  required libraries: 
import torch
from torch.nn import Linear
from torch_geometric.nn import MessagePassing
from torch_geometric.utils import add_self_loops, degree 
 We declare the GCN class that inherits  from  MessagePassing : 
class GCNConv(MessagePassing): 
 This takes two parameters – the input dimensionality and the output (hidden) dimensionality.  MessagePassing  is initialized with the “add” aggregation. We define a single PyTorch linear layer  without bias: 
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_h):
        super().__init__(aggr='add')
        self.linear = Linear(dim_in, dim_h, bias=False) 
 The  forward()  function  contains the logic. First, we add self-loops to the adjacency matrix to consider  target nodes: 
    def forward(self, x, edge_index):
        edge_index, _ = add_self_loops(edge_index, num_nodes=x.size(0)) 
 Then, we apply a linear transformation using the linear layer we  previously defined: 
        x = self.linear(x) 
 We compute the normalization factor –  : 
        row, col = edge_index
        deg = degree(col, x.size(0), dtype=x.dtype)
        deg_inv_sqrt = deg.pow(-0.5)
        deg_inv_sqrt[deg_inv_sqrt == float('inf')] = 0
        norm = deg_inv_sqrt[row] * deg_inv_sqrt[col] 
 We call the  propagate()  method with our updated  edge_index  (including self-loops) and our normalization factors, stored in the  norm  tensor. Internally, this method calls  message() ,  aggregate() , and  update() . We do not need to redefine  update()  because we already included the self-loops. The  aggregate()  function is already specified in  step 3   with  aggr='add' : 
        out = self.propagate(edge_index, x=x, norm=norm)
        return out 
 We redefine the  message()  function to normalize the neighboring node features  x   with  norm : 
    def message(self, x, norm):
        return norm.view(-1, 1) * x 
 We can now initialize and use this object as a  GCN layer: 
conv = GCNConv(16, 32) 
 
 This example shows how you can create your own GNN layers in PyTorch Geometric. You can also read how the GCN or GAT layers are implemented in the  source code. 
 The MPNN  framework is an important concept that will help us to transform our GNNs into  heterogeneous models. 
 Introducing heterogeneous graphs 
 Heterogeneous  graphs are a powerful tool to represent general relationships between different entities. Having different types of nodes and edges creates graph structures that are more complex but also more difficult to learn. In particular, one of the main problems with heterogeneous networks is that features from different types of nodes or edges do not necessarily have the same meaning or dimensionality. Therefore, merging different features would destroy a lot of information. This is not the case with homogeneous graphs, where each dimension has the exact same meaning for every node  or edge. 
 Heterogeneous graphs are a more general kind of network that can represent different types of nodes and edges. Formally, it is defined as a graph,  , comprising  , a set of nodes, and  , a set of edges. In the heterogeneous setting, it is associated with a node-type mapping function,   (where   denotes the set of node types), and a link-type mapping  function,   (where   denotes the set of  edge types). 
 The following figure is an example of a  heterogeneous graph. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 12.2 – An example of a heteregeneous graph with three types of nodes and three types of edges 
 In this graph, we see three types of nodes (users, games, and developers) and three types of edges ( follows ,  plays , and  develops ). It represents a network involving people (users and developers) and games that could be used for various applications, such as recommending games. If this graph contained millions of elements, it could be used as a graph-structured knowledge database, or a knowledge graph. Knowledge graphs are used by Google  or Bing to answer queries such as, “Who plays games developed by  Dev 1 ?” 
 Similar queries can extract useful homogeneous graphs. For example, we might want only to consider users who play  Game 1 . The output would be  User 1  and  User 2 . We can create more complex queries, such as, “Who are the users who play games developed by  Dev 1 ?” The result is the same, but we traversed two relations to obtain our users. This kind of query is called  a meta-path. 
 In the first example, our meta-path was  User → Game → User  (commonly denoted as  UGU ), and in  the second one, our meta-path was  User → Game → Dev → Game → User  (or  UGDGU ). Note  that the start node type and the end node type are the same. Meta-paths are an essential concept in heterogeneous graphs, often used to measure the similarity of  different nodes. 
 Now, let’s see how to implement the previous graph with PyTorch Geometric. We will use a special data object called  HeteroData . The following steps create a data object to store the graph from  Figure 12 .2 : 
 
 We import the  HeteroData  class from  torch_geometric.data  and create a  data  variable: 
from torch_geometric.data import HeteroData
data = HeteroData() 
 First, let’s store node features. We can access user features with  data['user'].x , for instance. We feed it a tensor with the  [num_users, num_features_users]  dimensions. The content does not matter in this example, so we will create feature vectors filled with ones for  user 1 , twos for  user 2 , and threes for  user 3 : 
data['user'].x = torch.Tensor([[1, 1, 1, 1], [2, 2, 2, 2], [3, 3, 3, 3]]) 
 We repeat this process with  games  and  devs . Note that the dimensionality of feature vectors is not the same; this is an important benefit of heterogeneous graphs when  handling  different representations: 
data['game'].x = torch.Tensor([[1, 1], [2, 2]])
data['dev'].x = torch.Tensor([[1], [2]]) 
 Let’s create connections between our nodes. Links have different meanings, which is why we will create three sets of edge indices. We can declare each set using a triplet  , such as  data['user', 'follows', 'user'].edge_index . Then, we store the connections in a tensor with the  [2, number of  edges]  dimensions: 
data['user', 'follows', 'user'].edge_index = torch.Tensor([[0, 1], [1, 2]]) # [2, num_edges_follows]
data['user', 'plays', 'game'].edge_index = torch.Tensor([[0, 1, 1, 2], [0, 0, 1, 1]])
data['dev', 'develops', 'game'].edge_index = torch.Tensor([[0, 1], [0, 1]]) 
 Edges can also have features – for example, the  plays  edges could include the number of hours the user played the corresponding game. In the following, we assume that  user 1  played  game 1  for 2 hours,  user 2  played  game 1  for half an hour and  game 2  for 10 hours, and  user 3  played  game 2  for  12 hours: 
data['user', 'plays', 'game'].edge_attr = torch.Tensor([[2], [0.5], [10], [12]]) 
 Finally, we  can print the  data  object to see  the result: 
 HeteroData( 
   user={ x=[3, 4] }, 
   game={ x=[2, 2] }, 
   dev={ x=[2, 1] }, 
   (user, follows, user)={ edge_index=[2, 2] }, 
   (user, plays, game)={ 
     edge_index=[2, 4], 
     edge_attr=[4, 1] 
   }, 
   (dev, develops, game)={ edge_index=[2, 2] } 
 ) 
 
 As you can see in this implementation, different types of nodes and edges do not share the same tensors. In fact, it is impossible because they don’t share the same dimensionality either. This raises a new issue – how do we aggregate information from multiple tensors  using GNNs? 
 So far, we have only focused our efforts on a single type. In practice, our weight matrices have the  right size to be multiplied with a predefined dimension. However, how do we implement GNNs when we get inputs with  different dimensionalities? 
 Transforming homogeneous GNNs to heterogeneous GNNs 
 To better  understand the problem, let’s take a real dataset as an example. The DBLP computer science bibliography offers a dataset,  [2-3] , that contains four types of nodes –  papers  (14,328),  terms  (7,723),  authors  (4,057), and  conferences  (20). This dataset’s goal is to correctly classify the authors into four categories – database, data mining, artificial intelligence, and information retrieval. The authors’ node features are a bag-of-words (“ 0 ” or “ 1 ”) of 334 keywords they might have used in their publications. The following figure summarizes the relations between the different  node types. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 12.3 – Relationships between node types in the DBLP dataset 
 These node types do not have the same dimensionalities and semantic relationships. In heterogeneous graphs, relations between nodes are essential, which is why we want to consider node pairs. For example, instead of feeding author nodes to a GNN layer, we would consider a pair such as ( author ,  paper ). It means we now need a GNN layer per relation; in this case, the “to” relations are bidirectional, so we would get  six layers. 
 These new layers have independent weight matrices with the right size for each node type. Unfortunately, we have only solved half of the problem. Indeed, we now have six distinct layers  that do  not share any information. We can fix that  by introducing  skip-connections ,  shared layers ,  jumping knowledge , and so  on [4]. 
 Before we transform a homogeneous model into a heterogeneous one, let’s implement a classic GAT on the DBLP dataset. The GAT cannot take into account different relations; we have to give it a unique adjacency matrix that connects authors to each other. Fortunately, we now  have a technique to generate this adjacency matrix easily – we can create a meta-path, such as  author-paper-author , that will connect authors from the  same papers. 
 Note 
 We can also build a good adjacency matrix through random walks. Even if the graph is heterogeneous, we can explore it and connect nodes that often appear in the  same sequences. 
 The code is a little more verbose, but we can implement a regular GAT  as follows: 
 
 We import the  required libraries: 
from torch import nn
import torch.nn.functional as F
import torch_geometric.transforms as T
from torch_geometric.datasets import DBLP
from torch_geometric.nn import GAT 
 We define the meta-path we will use using this  specific syntax: 
metapaths = [[('author', 'paper'), ('paper', 'author')]] 
 We use the  AddMetaPaths  transform function to automatically calculate our meta-path. We use  drop_orig_edge_types=True  to remove the other relations from the dataset (the GAT can only  consider one): 
transform = T.AddMetaPaths(metapaths=metapaths, drop_orig_edge_types=True) 
 We load the  DBLP  dataset and  print it: 
dataset = DBLP('.', transform=transform)
data = dataset[0]
print(data) 
 We obtain the  following output. Note the  (author, metapath_0, author)  relation that was created with our  transform function: 
 HeteroData( 
   metapath_dict={ (author, metapath_0, author)=[2] }, 
   author={ 
     x=[4057, 334], 
     y=[4057], 
     train_mask=[4057], 
     val_mask=[4057], 
     test_mask=[4057] 
   }, 
   paper={ x=[14328, 4231] }, 
   term={ x=[7723, 50] }, 
   conference={ num_nodes=20 }, 
   (author, metapath_0, author)={ edge_index=[2, 11113] } 
 ) 
 We directly create a one-layer GAT model with  in_channels=-1  to perform lazy initialization (the model will automatically calculate the value) and  out_channels=4  because we need to classify the author nodes into  four categories: 
model = GAT(in_channels=-1, hidden_channels=64, out_channels=4, num_layers=1) 
 We implement the  Adam  optimizer and store the model and the data on a GPU  if possible: 
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.001, weight_decay=0.001)
device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
data, model = data.to(device), model.to(device) 
 The  test()  function  measures the accuracy of  the prediction: 
@torch.no_grad()
def test(mask):
    model.eval()
    pred = model(data.x_dict['author'], data.edge_index_dict[('author', 'metapath_0', 'author')]).argmax(dim=-1)
    acc = (pred[mask] == data['author'].y[mask]).sum() / mask.sum()
    return float(acc) 
 We create a classic training loop, where the node features ( author ) and edge indexes ( author ,  metapath_0 , and  author ) are  carefully selected: 
for epoch in range(101):
    model.train()
    optimizer.zero_grad()
    out = model(data.x_dict['author'], data.edge_index_dict[('author', 'metapath_0', 'author')])
    mask = data['author'].train_mask
    loss = F.cross_entropy(out[mask], data['author'].y[mask])
    loss.backward()
    optimizer.step()
    if epoch % 20 == 0:
        train_acc = test(data['author'].train_mask)
        val_acc = test(data['author'].val_mask)
        print(f'Epoch: {epoch:>3} | Train Loss: {loss:.4f} | Train Acc: {train_acc*100:.2f}% | Val Acc: {val_acc*100:.2f}%') 
 We test it on  the test set with the  following output: 
test_acc = test(data['author'].test_mask)
print(f'Test accuracy: {test_acc*100:.2f}%')
 Test accuracy: 73.29% 
 
 We reduced our heterogeneous dataset into a homogeneous one using a meta-path and applied a traditional GAT. We obtained a test accuracy of 73.29%, which provides a good baseline to compare it to  other techniques. 
 Now, let’s create a heterogeneous version of this GAT model. Following the method we described previously, we need six GAT layers instead of one. We don’t have to do it manually, since PyTorch Geometric can do it automatically using the  to_hetero()  or  to_hetero_bases()  functions. The  to_hetero()  function takes three  important parameters: 
 
 module : The homogeneous model we want  to convert 
 metadata : Information about the heterogeneous nature of the graph, represented by a tuple,  ( node_types, edge_types) 
 aggr : The aggregator to combine node embeddings generated by different relations (for instance,  sum ,  max ,  or  mean ) 
 
 The following figure shows our homogeneous GAT (left) and its heterogeneous version (right), obtained   with  to_hetero() . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 12.4 – Architecture of a homogeneous GAT (left) and a heterogeneous GAT (right) on the DBLP dataset 
 As shown in the following steps, the heterogeneous GAT’s implementation  is similar: 
 
 First, we import GNN layers from  PyTorch Geometric: 
from torch_geometric.nn import GATConv, Linear, to_hetero 
 We load the  DBLP  dataset: 
dataset = DBLP(root='.')
data = dataset[0] 
 When we printed information about this dataset, you might have noticed that conference nodes do not have any features. This is an issue because our architecture assumes that each node type has its own features. We can fix this problem by generating zero values as features,  as follows: 
data['conference'].x = torch.zeros(20, 1) 
 We create our own GAT class with a GAT and linear layers. Note that we use lazy initialization  again with the  (-1, - 1)  tuple: 
class GAT(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_h, dim_out):
        super().__init__()
        self.conv = GATConv((-1, -1), dim_h, add_self_loops=False)
        self.linear = nn.Linear(dim_h, dim_out)
    def forward(self, x, edge_index):
        h = self.conv(x, edge_index).relu()
        h = self.linear(h)
        return h 
 We  instantiate  the model and convert it  using  to_hetero() : 
model = GAT(dim_h=64, dim_out=4)
model = to_hetero(model, data.metadata(), aggr='sum') 
 We implement the  Adam  optimizer and store the model and data on a GPU  if possible: 
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.001, weight_decay=0.001)
device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
data, model = data.to(device), model.to(device) 
 The test process is very similar. This time, we don’t need to specify any relation, since the model considers all  of them: 
@torch.no_grad()
def test(mask):
    model.eval()
    pred = model(data.x_dict, data.edge_index_dict)['author'].argmax(dim=-1)
    acc = (pred[mask] == data['author'].y[mask]).sum() / mask.sum()
    return float(acc) 
 The same  is true for the  training loop: 
for epoch in range(101):
    model.train()
    optimizer.zero_grad()
    out = model(data.x_dict, data.edge_index_dict)['author']
    mask = data['author'].train_mask
    loss = F.cross_entropy(out[mask], data['author'].y[mask])
    loss.backward()
    optimizer.step()
    if epoch % 20 == 0:
        train_acc = test(data['author'].train_mask)
        val_acc = test(data['author'].val_mask)
        print(f'Epoch: {epoch:>3} | Train Loss: {loss:.4f} | Train Acc: {train_acc*100:.2f}% | Val Acc: {val_acc*100:.2f}%') 
 We obtain the following  test accuracy: 
 test_acc = test(data['author'].test_mask) 
 print(f'Test accuracy: {test_acc*100:.2f}%') 
 Test accuracy: 78.42% 
 
 The heterogeneous GAT obtains a test accuracy of 78.42%. This is a good improvement (+5.13%) over the  homogeneous version, but can we do better? In the next section, we will explore an architecture that is specifically designed to process  heterogeneous networks. 
 Implementing a hierarchical self-attention network 
 In this section, we  will implement a GNN model designed to handle heterogeneous graphs – the  hierarchical self-attention network  ( HAN ). This architecture was introduced by Liu et al. in 2021 [5]. HAN uses self-attention at two  different levels: 
 
 Node-level attention  to  understand  the importance of neighboring nodes in a given meta-path (such as a GAT in a  homogeneous setting). 
 Semantic-level attention  to learn the importance of each meta-path. This is the main feature  of HAN, allowing us to select the best meta-paths for a given task automatically – for example, the meta-path  game-user-game  might be more relevant than  game-dev-game  in some tasks, such as predicting the number  of players. 
 
 In the following section, we will detail the three main components – node-level attention, semantic-level attention, and the prediction module. This architecture is illustrated in  Figure 12 .5 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 12.5 – HAN’s architecture with its three main modules 
 Like in a GAT, the first step consists of projecting nodes into a unified feature space for each meta-path. We  then calculate the weight of a node pair (concatenation of two projected nodes) in the same meta-path, with a second weight matrix. A nonlinear function is applied to this result, which is then normalized with the softmax function. The normalized attention score (importance) of the   node to the   node is calculated  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   denotes the features of the   node,   is a shared weight matrix for the   meta-path,   is the attention weight matrix for the   meta-path,   is a nonlinear activation function (such as LeakyReLU), and   is the set of neighbors of the   node (including itself) in the    meta-path. 
 Multi-head  attention is also performed to obtain the  final embedding: 
 
 
 
 
 
 With semantic-level attention, we repeat a similar process for the attention score of every meta-path (denoted  ). Every node embedding in a given meta-path (denoted as  ) is fed to an MLP that applies a nonlinear transformation. We compare this result to a new attention vector,  , as a similarity measure. We average this result to calculate the importance of a  given meta-path: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   (the MLP’s weight matrix),   (the MLP’s bias), and   (the semantic-level attention vector) are shared across  the meta-paths. 
 We must  normalize this result to compare the different semantic-level attention scores. We use the softmax function to obtain our  final weights: 
 
 
 
 
 
 The final embedding,  , that combines node-level and semantic-level attention is obtained  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 A final layer, like an MLP, is used to fine-tune the model for a particular downstream task, such as node classification or  link prediction. 
 Let’s implement this architecture in PyTorch Geometric on the  DBLP  dataset: 
 
 First, we import the  HAN layer: 
from torch_geometric.nn import HANConv 
 We load the  DBLP  dataset and introduce dummy features for  conference nodes: 
dataset = DBLP('.')
data = dataset[0]
data['conference'].x = torch.zeros(20, 1) 
 We create  the  HAN  class with two layers – a  HAN  convolution using  HANConv  and a  linear  layer for the  final classification: 
class HAN(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_out, dim_h=128, heads=8):
        super().__init__()
        self.han = HANConv(dim_in, dim_h, heads=heads, dropout=0.6, metadata=data.metadata())
        self.linear = nn.Linear(dim_h, dim_out) 
 In the  forward()  function, we have to specify that we are interested in  the authors: 
    def forward(self, x_dict, edge_index_dict):
        out = self.han(x_dict, edge_index_dict)
        out = self.linear(out['author'])
        return out 
 We initialize our model with lazy initialization ( dim_in=-1 ), so PyTorch Geometric automatically calculates the input size for each  node type: 
model = HAN(dim_in=-1, dim_out=4) 
 We choose the  Adam  optimizer and transfer our data and model to the GPU  if possible: 
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.001, weight_decay=0.001)
device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
data, model = data.to(device), model.to(device) 
 The  test()  function  calculates the accuracy of the  classification task: 
@torch.no_grad()
def test(mask):
    model.eval()
    pred = model(data.x_dict, data.edge_index_dict).argmax(dim=-1)
    acc = (pred[mask] == data['author'].y[mask]).sum() / mask.sum()
    return float(acc) 
 We train the model for 100 epochs. The only difference with a training loop for a homogeneous GNN is that we need to specify we’re interested in the author  node type: 
for epoch in range(101):
    model.train()
    optimizer.zero_grad()
    out = model(data.x_dict, data.edge_index_dict)
    mask = data['author'].train_mask
    loss = F.cross_entropy(out[mask], data['author'].y[mask])
    loss.backward()
    optimizer.step()
    if epoch % 20 == 0:
        train_acc = test(data['author'].train_mask)
        val_acc = test(data['author'].val_mask)
        print(f'Epoch: {epoch:>3} | Train Loss: {loss:.4f} | Train Acc: {train_acc*100:.2f}% | Val Acc: {val_acc*100:.2f}%') 
 The training  gives us the  following output: 
 Epoch:   0 | Train Loss: 1.3829 | Train Acc: 49.75% | Val Acc: 37.75% 
 Epoch:  20 | Train Loss: 1.1551 | Train Acc: 86.50% | Val Acc: 60.75% 
 Epoch:  40 | Train Loss: 0.7695 | Train Acc: 94.00% | Val Acc: 67.50% 
 Epoch:  60 | Train Loss: 0.4750 | Train Acc: 97.75% | Val Acc: 73.75% 
 Epoch:  80 | Train Loss: 0.3008 | Train Acc: 99.25% | Val Acc: 78.25% 
 Epoch: 100 | Train Loss: 0.2247 | Train Acc: 99.50% | Val Acc: 78.75% 
 Finally, we test our solution on the  test set: 
test_acc = test(data['author'].test_mask)
print(f'Test accuracy: {test_acc*100:.2f}%')
 Test accuracy: 81.58% 
 
 HAN obtains a test accuracy of 81.58%, which is higher than what we got with the heterogeneous GAT (78.42%) and the classic GAT (73.29%). It shows the importance of building good representations that aggregate different types of nodes and relations. Heterogeneous  graphs’ techniques are highly application-dependent, but it is worth trying different options, especially when the relationships described in the network  are meaningful. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we introduced the MPNN framework to generalize GNN layers using three steps – message, aggregate, and update. In the rest of the chapter, we expanded this framework to consider heterogeneous networks, composed of different types of nodes and edges. This particular kind of graph allows us to represent various relations between entities, which are more insightful than a single type  of connection. 
 Moreover, we saw how to transform homogeneous GNNs into heterogeneous ones thanks to PyTorch Geometric. We described the different layers in our heterogeneous GAT, which take node pairs as inputs to model their relations. Finally, we implemented a heterogeneous-specific architecture with  HAN  and compared the results of three techniques on the  DBLP  dataset. It proved the importance of exploiting the heterogeneous information that is represented in this kind  of network. 
 In  Chapter 13 ,  Temporal Graph Neural Networks , we will see how to consider time in GNNs. This chapter will unlock a lot of new applications thanks to temporal graphs, such as traffic forecasting. It will also introduce PyG’s extension library called PyTorch Geometric Temporal, which will help us to implement new models specifically designed to  handle time. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl.  Neural Message Passing for Quantum Chemistry . arXiv, 2017. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1704.01212.  Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.01212 . 
 [2] Jie Tang, Jing Zhang, Limin Yao, Juanzi Li, Li Zhang, and Zhong Su.  ArnetMiner: Extraction and Mining of Academic Social Networks . In Proceedings of the Fourteenth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (SIGKDD’2008). pp.990–998.  Available:  https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/1401890.1402008 . 
 [3] X. Fu, J. Zhang, Z. Meng, and I. King.  MAGNN: Metapath Aggregated Graph Neural Network for Heterogeneous Graph Embedding . Apr. 2020. DOI: 10.1145/3366423.3380297.  Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.01680 . 
 [4] M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. van den Berg, I. Titov, and M. Welling.  Modeling Relational Data with Graph Convolutional Networks . arXiv, 2017. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1703.06103.  Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06103 . 
 [5] J. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Xiang, and C. Pan.  HAN: An Efficient Hierarchical Self-Attention Network for Skeleton-Based Gesture Recognition . arXiv, 2021. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2106.13391.  Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.13391 . 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 13 
 Temporal Graph Neural Networks 
 In the previous chapters, we have only considered graphs where edges and features do not change. However, in the real world, there are many applications where this is not the case. For instance, in social networks, people follow and unfollow other users, posts go viral, and profiles evolve over time. This dynamicity cannot be represented using the GNN architectures we previously described. Instead, we must embed a new temporal dimension to transform static graphs into dynamic ones. These dynamic networks will then  be used as  inputs for a new family of GNNs:  Temporal Graph Neural Networks  ( T-GNNs ), also called  Spatio-Temporal GNNs . 
 In this chapter, we will describe two kinds of  dynamic graphs  that include spatiotemporal information. We will list different applications and focus on time series forecasting, where temporal GNNs are mainly applied. The second section is dedicated to an application we previously looked at: web traffic forecasting. This time, we will exploit temporal information to improve our results and obtain reliable predictions. Finally, we will describe another temporal GNN architecture designed for dynamic graphs. We will apply it to epidemic forecasting to predict the number of cases of COVID-19 in different regions  of England. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will know the difference between the two main types of dynamic graphs. This is particularly useful for modeling your data into the right kind of graph. Moreover, you will learn about the design and architecture of two temporal GNNs and how to implement them using PyTorch Geometric Temporal. This is an essential step to creating your own applications with  temporal information. 
 In this chapter, we will cover the following  main topics: 
 
 Introducing  dynamic graphs 
 Forecasting  web traffic 
 Predicting cases  of COVID-19 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter13 . 
 Installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  of  this book. 
 Introducing dynamic graphs 
 Dynamic graphs and temporal GNNs unlock a variety of new applications, such as transport and web traffic forecasting, motion classification, epidemiological forecasting, link prediction, power  system forecasting, and so on. Time series forecasting is particularly popular with this kind of graph, as we can use historical data to predict the system’s  future behavior. 
 In this chapter, we focus on graphs with a temporal component. They can be divided into  two categories: 
 
 Static graphs with temporal signals : The underlying graph does not change, but features and  labels evolve  over time. 
 Dynamic graphs with temporal signals : The topology of the graph (the presence of  nodes and edges), features, and labels evolve  over time. 
 
 In the first case, the graph’s topology is  static . For example, it can represent a network of cities within a country for traffic forecasting: features change over time, but the connections stay  the same. 
 In the second option, nodes and/or connections are  dynamic . It is useful to represent a social network where links between users can appear or disappear over time. This variant is more general, but also harder to learn how  to implement. 
 In the following sections, we will see how to handle these two types of graphs with temporal signals using PyTorch  Geometric Temporal. 
 Forecasting web traffic 
 In this section, we will predict  the traffic of Wikipedia articles (as an example of a static graph with a temporal signal) using a temporal GNN. This regression task has already been covered in  Chapter 6 ,  Introducing Graph Convolutional Networks . However, in that version of the task, we performed traffic forecasting using a static dataset without a temporal signal: our model did not have any information about previous instances. This is an issue because it could not understand whether the traffic was currently increasing or decreasing, for example. We can now improve this model to include information about  past instances. 
 We will first introduce the temporal GNN architecture with its two variants and then implement it using PyTorch  Geometric Temporal. 
 Introducing EvolveGCN 
 For this task, we will use the  EvolveGCN  architecture. Introduced by Pareja et al. [1] in 2019, it proposes a  natural combination of GNNs and  Recurrent Neural Networks  ( RNNs ). Previous approaches, such  as graph convolutional recurrent networks, applied RNNs with graph convolution operators to calculate node embeddings. By contrast, EvolveGCN applies RNNs to the GCN  parameters themselves. As the name implies, the GCN evolves over time to produce relevant temporal node embeddings. The following figure illustrates a high-level view of  this process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13.1 – The EvolveGCN’s architecture to produce node embeddings for a static or dynamic graph with temporal signal 
 This architecture has  two variants: 
 
 EvolveGCN-H , where the recurrent neural  network considers both the previous GCN parameters and the current  node embeddings 
 EvolveGCN-O , where the recurrent  neural network only considers the previous  GCN parameters 
 
 EvolveGCN-H typically uses a  Gated Recurrent Unit  ( GRU ) instead of a vanilla RNN. The GRU is a  streamlined version of the  Long Short-Term Memory  ( LSTM ) unit that achieves  comparable performance with fewer parameters. It is comprised of a reset gate, an update gate, and a  cell state. In this architecture, GRU updates the GCN’s weight matrix for layer   at time    as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
  denotes the node embeddings produced at layer   and time  , and   is the weight matrix for layer   from the previous  time step. 
 This resulting GCN weight matrix is then  used to calculate the next layer’s  node embeddings: 
   
 
 Here,   is the  adjacency matrix, including self-loops, and   is the degree matrix  with self-loops. 
 These steps are summarized in the  following figure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13.2 – The EvolveGCN-H’s architecture with GRU and GNN 
 EvolveGCN-H can be implemented with a GRU that receives  two extensions: 
 
 The inputs and hidden states are matrices instead of vectors to store the GCN weight  matrices properly 
 The column dimension of the input must match that of the hidden state, which requires summarizing the node embedding matrix   to only keep the appropriate number  of columns 
 
 These extensions are not  required for the EvolveGCN-O variant. Indeed, EvolveGCN-O is based on an LSTM network to model the input-output relationship. We do not need to feed a hidden state to the  LSTM, as it already includes a cell that remembers previous values. This mechanism simplifies the update step, which can be written  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 The resulting GCN weight matrix is used in the same way to produce the next layer’s  node embeddings: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This implementation is simpler since the temporal dimension entirely relies on a vanilla LSTM network. The following figure shows how EvolveGCN-O updates the weight matrix   and calculates node  embeddings  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13.3 – EvolveGCN-O’s architecture with LSTM and GCN 
 So which version  should we use? As is often the case in machine learning, the best solution  is data-dependent: 
 
 EvolveGCN-H works better when the node features are essential because its RNN explicitly  incorporates  node embeddings 
 EvolveGCN-O works better when the graph structure plays an important role, as it focuses more on  topological changes 
 
 Note that these remarks are primarily theoretical, which is why it can be helpful to test both variants in your applications. This is what we will do by implementing these models for web  traffic forecasting. 
 Implementing EvolveGCN 
 In this section, we want to forecast  web traffic on a static graph with a  temporal signal. The  WikiMaths  dataset is comprised of 1,068 articles represented as nodes. Node features correspond to the past daily number of visits (eight features by default). Edges are weighted, and weights represent the number of links from the source page to the destination page. We want to predict the daily user visits to these Wikipedia pages between March 16, 2019, and March 15, 2021, which results in 731 snapshots. Each snapshot is a graph describing the state of the system at a  certain time. 
 Figure 13 .4  shows a representation of WikiMaths made with Gephi, where the size and color of the nodes are proportional to their number  of connections. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13.4 – WikiMaths dataset as an unweighted graph (t=0) 
 PyTorch Geometric does not natively support static or dynamic graphs with a temporal signal. Fortunately, an extension  called PyTorch Geometric Temporal [2] fixes this issue and even implements various temporal GNN layers. The WikiMaths dataset was also made public during the development of PyTorch Geometric Temporal. In this chapter, we will use this library to simplify the code and focus  on applications: 
 
 We need to install this library in an environment containing  PyTorch Geometric: 
pip install torch-geometric-temporal==0.54.0 
 We import the WikiMaths dataset, called  WikiMathDatasetLoader , a temporal-aware train-test split with  temporal_signal_split , and our GNN  layer,  EvolveGCNH : 
from torch_geometric_temporal.signal import temporal_signal_split
from torch_geometric_temporal.dataset import WikiMathsDatasetLoader
from torch_geometric_temporal.nn.recurrent import EvolveGCNH 
 We load the WikiMaths dataset, which is a  StaticGraphTemporalSignal  object. In this object,  dataset[0]  describes the graph (also called a snapshot in this context) at   and  dataset[500]  at  . We also create a train-test split with  a ratio of  0.5 . The training set is composed of snapshots from the earlier time periods, while the test set regroups snapshots from the  later periods: 
dataset = WikiMathsDatasetLoader().get_dataset() train_dataset, test_dataset = temporal_signal_split(dataset, train_ratio=0.5)
dataset[0]
Data(x=[1068, 8], edge_index=[2, 27079], edge_attr=[27079], y=[1068])
dataset[500]
Data(x=[1068, 8], edge_index=[2, 27079], edge_attr=[27079], y=[1068]) 
 The graph is static, so the node and edge dimensions do not change. However, the values contained in these tensors are different. It is difficult to visualize the values of each of the 1,068 nodes. To better understand this dataset, we can calculate the mean and standard deviation values for each snapshot instead. The moving average is also helpful in smoothing out  short-term fluctuations. 
import pandas as pd
mean_cases = [snapshot.y.mean().item() for snapshot in dataset]
std_cases = [snapshot.y.std().item() for snapshot in dataset]
df = pd.DataFrame(mean_cases, columns=['mean'])
df['std'] = pd.DataFrame(std_cases, columns=['std'])
df['rolling'] = df['mean'].rolling(7).mean() 
 We plot these  time series with  matplotlib  to visualize  our task: 
plt.figure(figsize=(15,5))
plt.plot(df['mean'], 'k-', label='Mean')
plt.plot(df['rolling'], 'g-', label='Moving average')
plt.grid(linestyle=':')
plt.fill_between(df.index, df['mean']-df['std'], df['mean']+df['std'], color='r', alpha=0.1)
plt.axvline(x=360, color='b', linestyle='--')
plt.text(360, 1.5, 'Train/test split', rotation=-90, color='b')
plt.xlabel('Time (days)')
plt.ylabel('Normalized number of visits')
plt.legend(loc='upper right') 
 
 This produces  Figure 13 .5 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13.5 – WikiMaths’ mean normalized number of visits with moving average 
 Our data presents periodic patterns that the temporal GNN can hopefully learn. We can now implement it and see how  it performs. 
 
 The temporal GNN takes  two parameters as inputs: the number of nodes ( node_count ) and the input dimension ( dim_in ). The GNN only has two layers: an EvolveGCN-H layer and a linear layer that outputs a predicted value for  each node: 
class TemporalGNN(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, node_count, dim_in):
        super().__init__()
        self.recurrent = EvolveGCNH(node_count, dim_in)
        self.linear = torch.nn.Linear(dim_in, 1) 
 The  forward()  function applies both layers to the input with a ReLU  activation function: 
    def forward(self, x, edge_index, edge_weight):
        h = self.recurrent(x, edge_index, edge_weight).relu()
        h = self.linear(h)
        return h 
 We create an instance of  TemporalGNN  and give it the number of nodes and input dimension from  the WikiMaths dataset. We will train it using the  Adam  optimizer: 
model = TemporalGNN(dataset[0].x.shape[0], dataset[0].x.shape[1])
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.01)
model.train() 
 We can print the model to observe the layers contained  in  EvolveGCNH : 
model
TemporalGNN(
  (recurrent): EvolveGCNH(
    (pooling_layer): TopKPooling(8, ratio=0.00749063670411985, multiplier=1.0)
    (recurrent_layer): GRU(8, 8)
    (conv_layer): GCNConv_Fixed_W(8, 8)
  )
  (linear): Linear(in_features=8, out_features=1, bias=True)
) 
 
 We see three layers:  TopKPooling , which summarizes the input matrix in eight columns;  GRU , which updates the GCN weight matrix; and  GCNConv , which produces the new node embedding. Finally, a linear layer outputs a predicted value for every node in  the graph. 
 
 We create a training loop that trains the model on every snapshot from the training set. The loss is backpropagated for  every snapshot: 
for epoch in range(50):
    for i, snapshot in enumerate(train_dataset):
        y_pred = model(snapshot.x, snapshot.edge_index, snapshot.edge_attr)
        loss = torch.mean((y_pred-snapshot.y)**2)
        loss.backward()
        optimizer.step()
        optimizer.zero_grad() 
 Likewise, we evaluate the  model on the test set. The MSE is averaged on the entire test set to produce the  final score: 
model.eval()
loss = 0
for i, snapshot in enumerate(test_dataset):
    y_pred = model(snapshot.x, snapshot.edge_index, snapshot.edge_attr)
    mse = torch.mean((y_pred-snapshot.y)**2)
    loss += mse
loss = loss / (i+1)
print(f'MSE = {loss.item():.4f}')
MSE = 0.7559 
 We obtain a loss value of 0.7559. Next, we will plot the mean values predicted by our model on the previous graph to interpret it. The process is straightforward: we must average the predictions and store them in a list. Then, we can add them to the  previous plot: 
 y_preds = [model(snapshot.x, snapshot.edge_index, snapshot.edge_attr).squeeze().detach().numpy().mean() for snapshot in test_dataset]
plt.figure(figsize=(10,5))
plt.plot(df['mean'], 'k-', label='Mean')
plt.plot(df['rolling'], 'g-', label='Moving average')
plt.plot(range(360,722), y_preds, 'r-', label='Prediction')
plt.grid(linestyle=':')
plt.fill_between(df.index, df['mean']-df['std'], df['mean']+df['std'], color='r', alpha=0.1)
plt.axvline(x=360, color='b', linestyle='--')
plt.text(360, 1.5, 'Train/test split', rotation=-90, color='b')
plt.xlabel('Time (days)')
plt.ylabel('Normalized number of visits')
plt.legend(loc='upper right') 
 
 That  gives us  Figure 13 .6 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13.6 – Predicted mean normalized number of visits 
 We can see that the predicted values follow the general trend in the data. This is an excellent result, considering the limited size of  the dataset. 
 
 Finally, let’s create a  scatter plot to show how predicted and ground truth values differ for a  single snapshot: 
import seaborn as sns
y_pred = model(test_dataset[0].x, test_dataset[0].edge_index, test_dataset[0].edge_attr).detach().squeeze().numpy()
plt.figure(figsize=(10,5))
sns.regplot(x=test_dataset[0].y.numpy(), y=y_pred) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13.7 – Predicted versus ground truth values for the WikiMaths dataset 
 We observe a moderate positive correlation between predicted and real values. Our model is not remarkably accurate, but the previous figure showed that it understands the periodic nature of the data   very well. 
 Implementing the EvolveGCN-O variant is very similar. Instead of using the  EvolveGCNH  layer from PyTorch Geometric Temporal, we replace it with  EvolveGCNO . This layer does not require the number of nodes, so we only give it the input dimension. It is implemented  as follows: 
 
from torch_geometric_temporal.nn.recurrent import EvolveGCNO
class TemporalGNN(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_in):
        super().__init__()
        self.recurrent = EvolveGCNO(dim_in, 1)
        self.linear = torch.nn.Linear(dim_in, 1)
    def forward(self, x, edge_index, edge_weight):
        h = self.recurrent(x, edge_index, edge_weight).relu()
        h = self.linear(h)
        return h
model = TemporalGNN(dataset[0].x.shape[1]) 
 On average, the EvolveGCN-O model obtains similar results with an average MSE of 0.7524. In this case, the use of a GRU or LSTM network does not impact the predictions. This is understandable since both the past numbers of visits contained in node features (EvolveGCN-H) and the connections between pages (EvolveGCN-O) are essential. As a result, this GNN architecture is  particularly well-suited to this traffic  forecasting task. 
 Now that we have seen an example of a static graph, let’s explore how to process  dynamic graphs. 
 Predicting cases of COVID-19 
 This section will focus on a new application  with epidemic forecasting. We will use the  England Covid dataset , a dynamic graph with temporal information introduced by Panagopoulos et al. in 2021 [3]. While nodes are static, connections between and edge weights vary over time. This dataset  represents the number of reported cases of COVID-19 in 129 England NUTS 3 regions between March 3 and May 12, 2020. Data was collected from mobile phones that installed the Facebook application and shared their location history. Our goal is to predict the number of cases in each node (region) in  1 day. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13.8 – NUTS 3 areas in England are colored in red 
 This dataset represents England as a graph  . Due to the temporal nature of this dataset, it is composed of  multiple graphs corresponding to each day of the studied period  . In these graphs, node features correspond to the number of cases in each of the past   days in this region. Edges are unidirectional and weighted: the weight   of edge   represents the number of people that moved from region   to region   at time  . These graphs also contain self-loops corresponding to people moving within the  same region. 
 This section will introduce  a new GNN architecture designed for this task and show how to implement it step  by step. 
 Introducing MPNN-LSTM 
 As its name suggests,  MPNN-LSTM  architecture relies on combining an MPNN and an LSTM network. Like the England Covid dataset, it was also introduced by Panagopoulos et al. in  2021 [3]. 
 The input node features  with the corresponding edge indexes  and weights are fed to a GCN layer. We apply a batch normalization layer and a dropout to this output. This process is repeated a second time with the outcome of the first MPNN. It produces a node embedding matrix  . We create a sequence   of node embedding representations by applying these MPNNs for each time step. This sequence is fed to a 2-layer LSTM network to capture the temporal information from the graphs. Finally, we apply a linear transformation and a ReLU function to this output to produce a prediction  at  . 
 The following figure shows a high-level view of the  MPNN-LSTM’s architecture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13.9 – MPNN-LSTM’s architecture 
 The authors of MPNN-LSTM note that it is not the  best-performing model on the England Covid dataset (the MPNN with a two-level GNN is). However, it is an interesting approach that could perform better in other scenarios. They  also state that it is more suited for long-term forecasting, such as 14 days in the future instead of a single day, as in our  version of this dataset. Despite this issue, we use the latter for convenience, as it does not impact the design of  the solution. 
 Implementing MPNN-LSTM 
 First, it is important to visualize  the number of cases we want to predict. As in the previous section, we will summarize the 129 different time series that  composed the dataset by calculating their mean and  standard deviation: 
 
 We import  pandas ,  matplotlib , the England Covid dataset, and the temporal train-test split function from PyTorch  Geometric Temporal: 
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from torch_geometric_temporal.dataset import EnglandCovidDatasetLoader
from torch_geometric_temporal.signal import temporal_signal_split 
 We load the dataset with 14 lags, corresponding to the number of  node features: 
dataset = EnglandCovidDatasetLoader().get_dataset(lags=14) 
 We perform a temporal  signal split with a training  ratio  of  0.8 : 
train_dataset, test_dataset = temporal_signal_split(dataset, train_ratio=0.8) 
 We plot the following graph to show the mean normalized number of reported cases (they are reported approximately every day). The code is available on GitHub and adapts the snippet we used in the  last section. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13.10 – England Covid dataset’s mean normalized number of cases 
 This plot shows a lot of volatility and a low number of snapshots. This is why we use an 80/20 train-test split in this example. Obtaining good performance on such a small dataset might be  challenging, nonetheless. 
 Let’s now implement the  MPNN-LSTM architecture. 
 
 We import the  MPNNLSTM  layer from PyTorch  Geometric Temporal: 
From torch_geometric_temporal.nn.recurrent import MPNNLSTM 
 The temporal GNN takes three parameters as inputs: the input dimension, the hidden dimension, and  the number of nodes. We  declare three layers: the MPNN-LSTM layer, a dropout layer, and a linear layer with the right  input dimension: 
Class TemporalGNN(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_in, dim_h, num_nodes):
        super().__init__()
        self.recurrent = MPNNLSTM(dim_in, dim_h, num_nodes, 1, 0.5)
        self.dropout = torch.nn.Dropout(0.5)
        self.linear = torch.nn.Linear(2*dim_h + dim_in, 1) 
 The  forward()  function considers the edge weights, an essential piece of information in this dataset. Note that we are processing a dynamic graph, so a new set of values for  edge_index  and  edge_weight  are provided at each time step. Unlike the original MPNN-LSTM described previously, we replace the final ReLU function with a  tanh  function. The main motivation is that tanh outputs values between -1 and 1, instead of 0 and 1, which is closer to what we observed in  the dataset: 
    Def forward(self, x, edge_index, edge_weight):
        h = self.recurrent(x, edge_index, edge_weight).relu()
        h = self.dropout(h)
        h = self.linear(h).tanh()
        return h 
 We create our  MPNN-LSTM model with a hidden dimension of 64 and print it to observe the  different  layers: 
model = TemporalGNN(dataset[0].x.shape[1], 64, dataset[0].x.shape[0])
print(model)
TemporalGNN(
  (recurrent): MPNNLSTM(
    (_convolution_1): GCNConv(14, 64)
    (_convolution_2): GCNConv(64, 64)
    (_batch_norm_1): BatchNorm1d(64, eps=1e-05, momentum=0.1, affine=True, track_running_stats=True)
    (_batch_norm_2): BatchNorm1d(64, eps=1e-05, momentum=0.1, affine=True, track_running_stats=True)
    (_recurrent_1): LSTM(128, 64)
    (_recurrent_2): LSTM(64, 64)
  )
  (dropout): Dropout(p=0.5, inplace=False)
  (linear): Linear(in_features=142, out_features=1, bias=True)
) 
 
 We see that the MPNN-LSTM layer contains two GCN, two batch normalization, and two LSTM layers (but no dropout), which corresponds to our  previous description. 
 
 We train this model for  100  epochs with the  Adam  optimizer and a learning rate of  0.001 . This time, we  backpropagate the loss after every snapshot instead of  every instance: 
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.001)
model.train()
for epoch in range(100):
    loss = 0
    for i, snapshot in enumerate(train_dataset):
        y_pred = model(snapshot.x, snapshot.edge_index, snapshot.edge_attr)
        loss = loss + torch.mean((y_pred-snapshot.y)**2)
    loss = loss / (i+1)
    loss.backward()
    optimizer.step()
    optimizer.zero_grad() 
 We evaluate the  trained model on the test set and obtain the following  MSE loss: 
model.eval()
loss = 0
for i, snapshot in enumerate(test_dataset):
    y_pred = model(snapshot.x, snapshot.edge_index, snapshot.edge_attr)
    mse = torch.mean((y_pred-snapshot.y)**2)
    loss += mse
loss = loss / (i+1)
print(f'MSE: {loss.item():.4f}')
MSE: 1.3722 
 
 The MPNN-LSTM model obtained an MSE loss of 1.3722, which seems  relatively high. 
 We cannot invert the  normalization process that was applied to this dataset, so we will use the normalized numbers of cases instead. First, let’s plot the mean normalized number of cases that our model predicted (code available  on GitHub). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13.11 – Mean normalized number of cases with true values in black and predicted values in red 
 As expected, the predicted  values do not match the ground truth very well. This is probably due to the lack of data: our model learned an average value that minimizes the MSE loss but cannot fit the curve and understand  its periodicity. 
 Let’s inspect the scatter plot corresponding to the test set’s first snapshot (code available  on GitHub). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13.12 – Predicted versus ground truth values for the England Covid dataset 
 The scatter plot shows a weak correlation. We see that the predictions (y-axis) are mostly centered around 0.35 with little variance. This does not correspond to the ground truth values, spanning from -1.5 to 0.6. As per our experiments, adding a second linear layer did not improve the  MPNN-LSTM’s predictions. 
 Several strategies  could be implemented to help the model. First, more data points could greatly help because this is a small dataset. Additionally, the time series contains two interesting characteristics: trends (continued increase and decrease over time) and seasonality (predictable pattern). We could add a preprocessing step to remove these characteristics, which  add noise to the signal we want  to predict. 
 Beyond recurrent neural networks, self-attention is another popular technique to create temporal GNNs [4]. Attention can be restricted to temporal information or also consider spatial data, typically handled by graph convolution. Finally, temporal GNNs can also be extended to heterogeneous settings described in the previous chapter. Unfortunately, this combination requires even more data and is currently an active area  of research. 
 Summary 
 This chapter introduced a new type of graph with spatiotemporal information. This temporal component is helpful in many applications, mostly related to time series forecasting. We described two types of graphs that fit this description: static graphs, where features evolve over time, and dynamic graphs, where features and topology can change. Both of them are handled by PyTorch Geometric Temporal, PyG’s extension dedicated to temporal graph  neural networks. 
 Additionally, we covered two applications of temporal GNNs. First, we implemented the EvolveGCN architecture, which uses a GRU or an LSTM network to update the GCN parameters. We applied it by revisiting web traffic forecasting, a task we encountered in  Chapter 6 ,  Introducing Graph Convolutional Networks , and achieved excellent results with a limited dataset. Secondly, we used the MPNN-LSTM architecture for epidemic forecasting. We applied to the England Covid dataset a dynamic graph with a temporal signal, but its small size did not allow us to obtain  comparable results. 
 In  Chapter 14 ,  Explaining Graph Neural Networks , we will focus on how to interpret our results. Beyond the different visualizations we have introduced so far, we will see how to apply techniques from  eXplainable Artificial Intelligence  ( XAI ) to graph neural networks. This field is a key component to build robust AI systems and improve machine learning adoption. In that chapter, we will introduce post hoc explanation methods and new layers to build models that are explainable  by design. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] A. Pareja et al.,  EvolveGCN: Evolving Graph Convolutional Networks for Dynamic Graphs . arXiv, 2019. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1902.10191.  Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.10191 
 [2] B. Rozemberczki et al.,  PyTorch Geometric Temporal: Spatiotemporal Signal Processing with Neural Machine Learning Models , in Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, 2021, pp. 4564–4573.  Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.07788 
 [3] G. Panagopoulos, G. Nikolentzos, and M. Vazirgiannis.  Transfer Graph Neural Networks for Pandemic Forecasting . arXiv, 2020. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2009.08388.  Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.08388 
 [4] Guo, S., Lin, Y., Feng, N., Song, C., & Wan, H. (2019). Attention Based Spatial-Temporal Graph Convolutional Networks for Traffic Flow Forecasting. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 33(01),  922-929.  https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.3301922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 14 
 Explaining Graph Neural Networks 
 One of the most common criticisms of NNs is that their outputs are difficult to understand. Unfortunately, GNNs are not immune to this limitation: in addition to explaining which features are important, it is necessary to consider neighboring nodes and connections. In response to this issue, the area of  explainability  (in the form of  explainable AI  or  XAI ) has developed many techniques to better understand the reasons behind a prediction or the  general behavior of a model. Some of these techniques have been translated to GNNs, while others take advantage of the graph structure to offer more  precise explanations. 
 In this chapter, we will explore some explanation techniques to understand why a given prediction has been made. We will see different families of techniques and focus on two of the most popular:  GNNExplainer  and  integrated gradients . We will apply the former on a graph classification task using the  MUTAG  dataset. Then, we will introduce  Captum , a Python library  that offers many explanation techniques. Finally, using the Twitch social network, we will implement integrated gradients to explain the model’s outputs on a node  classification task. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will be able to understand and implement several XAI techniques on GNNs. More specifically, you will learn how to use GNNExplainer and the  Captum  library (with integrated gradients) for graph and node  classification tasks. 
 In this chapter, we will cover the following  main topics: 
 
 Introducing  explanation techniques 
 Explaining GNNs  with GNNExplainer 
 Explaining GNNs  with Captum 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter14 . 
 Installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  of  this book. 
 Introducing explanation techniques 
 GNN explanation is a recent field that is heavily inspired by other XAI techniques [1]. We divide it into local explanations on a  per-prediction basis and global explanations for entire models. While understanding the behavior of a GNN model is desirable, we  will focus on local explanations that are more popular and essential to get insight into  a prediction. 
 In this chapter, we distinguish between “interpretable” and “explainable” models. A model is called “interpretable” if it is  human-understandable by design, such as a decision tree. On the other hand, it is “explainable” when it acts as a black  box whose predictions can only be retroactively understood using explanation techniques. This is typically the case with NNs: their weights and biases do not provide clear rules like a decision tree, but their results can be  explained indirectly. 
 There are four main categories of local  explanation techniques: 
 
 Gradient-based methods  analyze  gradients of the output to  estimate attribution  scores (for example,  integrated gradients ) 
 Perturbation-based methods  mask  or modify input features to measure changes  in the output (for  example,  GNNExplainer ) 
 Decomposition methods  decompose  the model’s predictions into several terms to  gauge their importance (for example, graph  neural network  layer-wise relevance  propagation  ( GNN-LRP )) 
 Surrogate methods  use a  simple  and interpretable model to approximate the original model’s  prediction around an area (for  example,  GraphLIME ) 
 
 These techniques are complementary: they sometimes disagree on the contribution of edges and features, which can be used to refine the explanation of a prediction further. Explanation techniques are traditionally evaluated using metrics such as  the following: 
 
 Fidelity , which compares  the prediction probabilities of   between the original graph   and a modified graph  . The modified graph only keeps the most important features (nodes, edges, node features) of  , based on an explanation of  . In other words, fidelity measures the extent to which the features identified as important are sufficient to obtain the correct prediction. It is formally defined  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sparsity , which  measures the fraction of features (nodes, edges, node features) that are considered important. Explanations that are too lengthy are more challenging to understand, which is why sparsity is encouraged. It is computed  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   is the number of important input features and   is the total number  of features. 
 In addition to the traditional graphs we saw in previous chapters, explanation techniques are often evaluated  on synthetic datasets, such as  BA-Shapes ,  BA-Community ,  Tree-Cycles , and  Tree-Grid  [2]. These datasets were generated using graph generation algorithms to create specific patterns. We will not use them in this chapter, but they are an interesting alternative that is easy to implement  and understand. 
 In the following sections, we will describe a gradient-based method (integrated gradients) and a perturbation-based  technique (GNNExplainer). 
 Explaining GNNs with GNNExplainer 
 In this section, we will introduce our first XAI technique with GNNExplainer. We will use it to understand the predictions produced by a GIN model on the  MUTAG  dataset. 
 Introducing GNNExplainer 
 Introduced in 2019  by Ying et al. [2], GNNExplainer is a GNN architecture designed to explain predictions from another GNN model. With tabular data, we want to know which features are the most important to a prediction. However, this is not enough with graph data: we also need to know which nodes are the most influential. GNNExplainer generates explanations with these two components by providing a subgraph   and a subset of node features  . The following figure illustrates an  explanation provided by GNNExplainer for a  given node: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 14.1 – Explanation for node  ’s label with   in green and non-excluded node features  
 To predict   and  , GNNExplainer implements an edge mask (to hide connections) and a feature mask (to hide node features). If a connection or a feature is important, removing it should drastically change the prediction. On the other hand, if the prediction does not change, it means that this information was redundant or simply irrelevant. This principle is at the core of perturbation-based techniques such  as GNNExplainer. 
 In practice, we must  carefully craft a loss function to find the best masks possible. GNNExplainer measures the mutual dependence between the predicted label distribution   and  , also called  mutual information  ( MI ). Our goal is to maximize the MI, which is  equivalent to minimizing the conditional cross-entropy. GNNExplainer is trained to find the variables   and   that maximize the probability of a  prediction  . 
 In addition to this optimization framework, GNNExplainer learns a binary feature mask and implements several regularization techniques. The most important technique is a term used to minimize the size of the explanation (sparsity). It is computed as the sum of all elements of the mask parameters and added to the loss function. It creates more user-friendly and concise explanations that are easier to understand  and interpret. 
 GNNExplainer can be applied to most GNN architectures and different tasks such as node classification, link prediction, or graph classification. It can also generate explanations of a class label or an entire graph. When classifying a graph, the model considers the union of  adjacency matrices for all nodes in the graph instead of a single one. In the next section, we will apply it to explain  graph classifications. 
 Implementing GNNExplainer 
 In this example, we will explore the  MUTAG  dataset [3]. Each of the 188 graphs in this dataset represents  a chemical compound, where nodes are atoms (seven possible atoms), and edges are chemical bonds (four possible bonds). Node and edge features represent one-hot encodings of the atom and edge types, respectively. The goal is to classify each compound into two classes according to their mutagenic effect on the bacteria  Salmonella typhimurium . 
 We will reuse the GIN model introduced in  Chapter 9  for protein classification. In  Chapter 9 , we visualized correct and incorrect classifications made by the model. However, we could not explain the predictions made by the GNN. This time, we’ll use GNNExplainer to understand the most important subgraph and node features to explain a classification. In this example, we will ignore the edge features for ease of use. Here are  the steps: 
 
 We import the required classes from PyTorch and  PyTorch Geometric: 
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import torch.nn.functional as F
from torch.nn import Linear, Sequential, BatchNorm1d, ReLU, Dropout
from torch_geometric.datasets import TUDataset
from torch_geometric.loader import DataLoader
from torch_geometric.nn import GINConv, global_add_pool, GNNExplainer 
 We load the  MUTAG  dataset and  shuffle it: 
dataset = TUDataset(root='.', name='MUTAG').shuffle() 
 We create training, validation, and  test sets: 
train_dataset = dataset[:int(len(dataset)*0.8)]
val_dataset   = dataset[int(len(dataset)*0.8):int(len(dataset)*0.9)]
test_dataset  = dataset[int(len(dataset)*0.9):] 
 We create data loaders to  implement mini-batching: 
train_loader = DataLoader(train_dataset, batch_size=64, shuffle=True)
val_loader   = DataLoader(val_dataset, batch_size=64, shuffle=True)
test_loader  = DataLoader(test_dataset, batch_size=64, shuffle=True) 
 We create  a GIN model with 32 hidden dimensions using code from  Chapter 9 : 
class GIN(torch.nn.Module):
...
model = GIN(dim_h=32) 
 We train this model for 100 epochs and test it using code from  Chapter 9 : 
def train(model, loader):
 ...
model = train(model, train_loader)
test_loss, test_acc = test(model, test_loader)
print(f'Test Loss: {test_loss:.2f} | Test Acc: {test_acc*100:.2f}%')
 Test Loss: 0.48 | Test Acc: 84.21% 
 Our GIN model is trained and achieved a high accuracy score ( 84.21% ). Now, let’s create a GNNExplainer model using the  GNNExplainer  class from PyTorch Geometric. We will train it for  100 epochs: 
explainer = GNNExplainer(model, epochs=100, num_hops=1) 
 GNNExplainer can be used to explain the prediction made for a node ( .explain_node() ) or an entire graph ( .explain_graph() ). In this case, we will use it on the last graph of the  test set: 
data = dataset[-1]
feature_mask, edge_mask = explainer.explain_graph(data.x, data.edge_index) 
 The last step returned the feature and edge masks. Let’s print the feature mask to see the most  important values: 
feature_mask
 tensor([0.7401, 0.7375, 0.7203, 0.2692, 0.2587, 0.7516, 0.2872]) 
 
 The values are normalized between 0 (less important) and 1 (more important). These seven  values correspond to the seven atoms we find in the dataset in the following order: carbon (C), nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), fluorine (F), iodine (I), chlorine (Cl), and bromine (Br). Features have similar importance: the most useful is the last one, representing bromine (Br), and the least important is the fifth one, representing  iodine (I). 
 
 Instead of printing the edge mask, we can plot it on the graph using the  .visualize_graph()  method. The arrows’ opacity represents the importance of  each connection: 
ax, G = explainer.visualize_subgraph(-1, data.edge_index, edge_mask, y=data.y)
plt.show() 
 
 This gives us  Figure 14 .2 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 14.2 – Graph representation of a chemical compound: the edge opacity represents the importance of each connection 
 The last plot shows the connections that contributed the most to the prediction. In this case, the GIN model correctly classified the graph. We can see that the links between nodes  6 ,  7 , and  8  are the  most relevant here. The highlighted connections were crucial in the classification of this chemical compound. We can learn more about them by printing  data.edge_attr  to obtain the label associated with their chemical bonds (aromatic, single, double, or triple). In this example, it corresponds to edges  16  to  19 , which all are either single or  double bonds. 
 By printing  data.x , we can also look at nodes  6 ,  7 , and  8  to gain more information. Node  6  represents an atom of nitrogen, while nodes  7  and  8  are two atoms of oxygen. These results should be reported to people with the right domain knowledge to get feedback on  our model. 
 GNNExplainer does not provide precise rules about the decision-making process but gives insights into what the GNN model focused on to make its prediction. Human expertise is still needed to  ensure that these ideas are coherent and correspond to traditional  domain knowledge. 
 In the next section, we will use Captum to explain node classifications on a new  social network. 
 Explaining GNNs with Captum 
 In this section, we will first introduce Captum and the integrated gradients technique applied to graph data. Then, we will implement it using a PyTorch Geometric model on the Twitch  social network. 
 Introducing Captum and integrated gradients 
 Captum  ( captum.ai ) is a Python  library that implements many state-of-the-art  explanation algorithms for PyTorch models. This library is not dedicated to GNNs: it can also be applied to text, images, tabular data, and so on. It is particularly useful because it allows users to quickly test various techniques and compare different explanations for the same prediction. In addition,  Captum  implements popular algorithms such as LIME and Gradient SHAP for primary, layer, and  neuron attributions. 
 In this section, we will use it to apply a graph version of integrated gradients [4]. This technique aims to  assign an attribution score to every input feature. To this end, it uses gradients with respect to the model’s inputs. Specifically, it uses an input   and a baseline input   (all edges have zero weight in our case). It computes the gradients at all points along the path between   and   and  accumulates them. 
 Formally, the integrated gradient along the   dimension for an input   is defined  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 In practice, instead of directly  calculating this integral, we approximate it with a  discrete sum. 
 Integrated gradients is model-agnostic and based on  two axioms: 
 
 Sensitivity : Every input  contributing to the prediction must receive a  nonzero attribution 
 Implementation invariance : Two NNs  whose outputs are equal for all inputs (these networks are called functionally equivalent) must have  identical attributions 
 
 The graph version we will employ is slightly different: it considers nodes and edges  instead of  features. As a result, you can see that the output differs from GNNExplainer, which considers node features  and  edges. This is why these two approaches can  be complementary. 
 Let’s now implement this technique and visualize  the results. 
 Implementing integrated gradients 
 We will implement integrated  gradients on a new dataset: the Twitch social networks dataset (English version) [5]. It represents a user-user graph, where nodes correspond to Twitch streamers and connections to mutual friendships. The 128 node features represent information such as streaming habits, location, games liked, and so on. The goal is to determine whether a streamer uses explicit language ( binary classification). 
 We will implement a simple two-layer GCN with PyTorch Geometric for this task. We will then convert  our model to Captum to use the integrated gradients algorithm and explain our results. Here are  the steps: 
 
 We install the  captum  library: 
!pip install captum 
 We import the  required libraries: 
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import torch.nn.functional as F
from captum.attr import IntegratedGradients
import torch_geometric.transforms as T
from torch_geometric.datasets import Twitch
from torch_geometric.nn import Explainer, GCNConv, to_captum 
 Let’s fix the random seeds to make  computations deterministic: 
torch.manual_seed(0)
np.random.seed(0) 
 We load the Twitch gamer network dataset ( English version): 
dataset = Twitch('.', name="EN")
data = dataset[0] 
 This time, we will use a simple two-layer GCN  with  dropout : 
class GCN(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_h):
        super().__init__()
        self.conv1 = GCNConv(dataset.num_features, dim_h)
        self.conv2 = GCNConv(dim_h, dataset.num_classes)
    def forward(self, x, edge_index):
        h = self.conv1(x, edge_index).relu()
        h = F.dropout(h, p=0.5, training=self.training)
        h = self.conv2(h, edge_index)
        return F.log_softmax(h, dim=1) 
 We try to train the model on a GPU—if one is available—using the  Adam  optimizer: 
device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
model = GCN(64).to(device)
data = data.to(device)
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.01, weight_decay=5e-4) 
 We train the  model for 200 epochs using the negative log-likelihood  loss function: 
for epoch in range(200):
    model.train()
    optimizer.zero_grad()
    log_logits = model(data.x, data.edge_index)
    loss = F.nll_loss(log_logits, data.y)
    loss.backward()
    optimizer.step() 
 We test the trained model. Note that we did not specify any test, so we will evaluate the GCN’s accuracy on the training set in  this case: 
def accuracy(pred_y, y):
    return ((pred_y == y).sum() / len(y)).item()
@torch.no_grad()
def test(model, data):
    model.eval()
    out = model(data.x, data.edge_index)
    acc = accuracy(out.argmax(dim=1), data.y)
    return acc
acc = test(model, data)
print(f'Accuracy: {acc*100:.2f}%')
 Accuracy: 79.75% 
 
 The model achieved an accuracy score of  79.75% , which is relatively low considering that it was evaluated on the  training set. 
 
 We can now start implementing the explanation method we chose: the integrated gradients. First, we  must specify the node we want to explain (node  0  in this example) and convert the PyTorch Geometric model to  Captum . Here, we also specify we want to use a feature and an edge mask  with  mask_type=node_and_feature : 
node_idx = 0
captum_model = to_captum(model, mask_type='node_and_edge', output_idx=node_idx) 
 Let’s create the integrated gradients object using  Captum . We give it the result of the previous step  as input: 
ig = IntegratedGradients(captum_model) 
 We already have the node mask we need to pass to  Captum  ( data.x ), but we need to create a tensor for the edge mask. In this example, we want to consider every edge in the graph, so initialize a tensor of ones with  size  data.num_edges : 
edge_mask = torch.ones(data.num_edges, requires_grad=True, device=device) 
 The  .attribute()  method  takes a specific format of inputs for the node and edge masks (hence the use of  .unsqueeze(0)  to reformat these tensors). The target corresponds to the class of our target node. Finally, we pass the adjacency matrix ( data.edge_index ) as an additional  forward argument: 
attr_node, attr_edge = ig.attribute(
    (data.x.unsqueeze(0), edge_mask.unsqueeze(0)),
    target=int(data.y[node_idx]),
    additional_forward_args=(data.edge_index),
    internal_batch_size=1) 
 We scale the attribution scores between  0   and  1 : 
attr_node = attr_node.squeeze(0).abs().sum(dim=1)
attr_node /= attr_node.max()
attr_edge = attr_edge.squeeze(0).abs()
attr_edge /= attr_edge.max() 
 Using PyTorch Geometric’s  Explainer  class, we visualize a graph representation of  these attributions: 
explainer = Explainer(model)
ax, G = explainer.visualize_subgraph(node_idx, data.edge_index, attr_edge, node_alpha=attr_node, y=data.y)
plt.show() 
 
 This gives us the  following output: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 14.3 – Explanation for node 0’s classification with edge and node attribution scores represented with different opacity values 
 Node  0 ’s subgraph  comprises blue nodes, which share the same class. We can see that node  82  is the most important node (other than 0) and the connection between these two nodes is the most critical edge. This is a straightforward explanation: we have a group of four streamers using the same language. The mutual friendship between nodes  0  and  82  is a good argument for  this prediction. 
 Let’s now look at another graph illustrated in  Figure 14 .4 , the explanation for node  101 ’s classification: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 14.4 – Explanation for node 101’s classification with edge and node attribution scores represented with different opacity values 
 In this case, our target node is connected to neighbors with different classes (nodes  5398  and  2849 ). Integrated gradients give greater importance to the node that shares the same class as node  101 . We also see that their connection is the one that contributed the  most to this classification. This subgraph is richer; you can see that even two-hop neighbors contribute  a little. 
 However, these explanations should not be considered a silver bullet. Explainability in AI is a rich topic that often involves people with different backgrounds. Thus, communicating the results and getting regular feedback is particularly important. Knowing the importance of edges, nodes, and features is essential, but it should only be the start of a discussion. Experts from other fields can exploit or refine these explanations, and even find issues that can lead to  architectural changes. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we explored the field of XAI applied to GNNs. Explainability is a key component in many areas and can help us to build better models. We saw different techniques to provide local explanations and focused on GNNExplainer (a perturbation-based method) and integrated gradients (a gradient-based method). We implemented them on two different datasets using PyTorch Geometric and Captum to obtain explanations for graph and node classification. Finally, we visualized and discussed the results of  these techniques. 
 In  Chapter 15 ,  Forecasting Traffic Using A3T-GCN , we will revisit temporal GNNs to predict future traffic on a road network. In this practical application, we will see how to translate roads into graphs and apply a recent GNN architecture to forecast short-term  traffic accurately. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] H. Yuan, H. Yu, S. Gui, and S. Ji.  Explainability in Graph Neural Networks: A Taxonomic Survey . arXiv, 2020. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2012.15445. Available  at  https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.15445 . 
 [2] R. Ying, D. Bourgeois, J. You, M. Zitnik, and J. Leskovec.  GNNExplainer: Generating Explanations for Graph Neural Networks . arXiv, 2019. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1903.03894. Available  at  https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.03894 . 
 [3] Debnath, A. K., Lopez de Compadre, R. L., Debnath, G., Shusterman, A. J., and Hansch, C. (1991).  Structure-activity relationship of mutagenic aromatic and heteroaromatic nitro compounds. Correlation with molecular orbital energies and hydrophobicity . DOI: 10.1021/jm00106a046.  Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 34(2), 786–797. Available  at  https://doi.org/10.1021/jm00106a046 . 
 [4] M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, and Q. Yan.  Axiomatic Attribution for Deep Networks . arXiv, 2017. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1703.01365. Available  at  https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.01365 . 
 [5] B. Rozemberczki, C. Allen, and R. Sarkar.  Multi-Scale Attributed Node Embedding .  arXiv ,  2019 . DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1909.13021. Available  at  https://arxiv.org/pdf/1909.13021.pdf . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 Part 4: Applications 
 In this fourth and final part of the book, we delve into the development of comprehensive applications that utilize real-world data. Our focus will be on encompassing aspects previously omitted in previous chapters, such as exploratory data analysis and data processing. We aim to provide an exhaustive overview of the machine learning pipeline, from raw data to model output analysis. We will also highlight the strengths and limitations of the  techniques discussed. 
 The projects in this section have been designed to be adaptable and customizable, enabling readers to apply them to other datasets and tasks with ease. This makes it an ideal resource for readers who wish to build a portfolio of applications and showcase their work  on GitHub. 
 By the end of this part, you will know how to implement GNNs for traffic forecasting, anomaly detection, and recommender systems. These projects have been selected to demonstrate the versatility and potential of GNNs in solving real-world problems. The knowledge and skills gained from these projects will prepare readers for developing their own applications and contributing to the field of  graph learning. 
 This part comprises the  following chapters: 
 
 Chapter 15 , Forecasting Traffic Using A3T-GCN 
 Chapter 16 , Detecting Anomalies Using Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks 
 Chapter 17 , Recommending Books Using LightGCN 
 Chapter 18 , Unlocking the Potential of Graph Neural Networks for Real-Word Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 15 
 Forecasting Traffic Using A3T-GCN 
 We  introduced T-GNNs in  Chapter 13 , but we did not elaborate on their main application:  traffic forecasting . In recent years, the concept of smart cities has become increasingly popular. This idea refers to cities where data is used to manage and improve operations and services. In this context, one of the main sources of appeal is the creation of intelligent transportation systems. Accurate traffic forecasts can help traffic managers to optimize traffic signals, plan infrastructure, and reduce congestion. However, traffic forecasting is a challenging problem due to complex spatial and  temporal dependencies. 
 In this chapter, we will apply T-GNNs to a particular case of traffic forecasting. First, we will explore and process a new dataset to create a temporal graph from raw CSV files. We will then apply a new type of T-GNN to predict future traffic speed. Finally, we will visualize and compare the results to a baseline solution to verify that our architecture  is relevant. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will know how to create a temporal graph dataset from tabular data. In particular, we will see how to create a weighted adjacency matrix that will provide us with edge weights. Finally, you will learn how to apply a T-GNN to a traffic forecasting task and evaluate  the results. 
 In this chapter, we will cover the following  main topics: 
 
 Exploring the  PeMS-M dataset 
 Processing  the dataset 
 Implementing a  temporal GNN 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter15 . 
 Installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  of this book. This chapter requires a large amount of GPU. You can lower it by decreasing the size of the training set in  the code. 
 Exploring the PeMS-M dataset 
 In this section, we  will explore our dataset to find patterns and get insights that will be useful to the task  of interest. 
 The dataset we will use for this application is the medium variant of the  PeMSD7  dataset [1]. The original dataset was obtained by collecting traffic speed from 39,000 sensor stations on the  weekdays of May and June 2012 using the Caltrans  Performance Measurement System  ( PeMS ). We will only consider 228 stations across District 7 of California in the medium variant. These stations output 30-second speed measurements that are aggregated into 5-minute intervals in this dataset. For example, the following figure shows the Caltrans PeMS ( pems.dot.ca.gov ) with various  traffic speeds: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 15.1 – Traffic data from Caltrans PeMS with high speed (>60 mph) in green and low speed (<35 mph) in red 
 We  can directly load the dataset from GitHub and  unzip it: 
 
from io import BytesIO
from urllib.request import urlopen
from zipfile import ZipFile
url = 'https://github.com/VeritasYin/STGCN_IJCAI-18/raw/master/data_loader/PeMSD7_Full.zip'
with urlopen(url) as zurl:
    with ZipFile(BytesIO(zurl.read())) as zfile:
        zfile.extractall('.') 
 The resulting folder contains two files:  V_228.csv  and  W_228.csv . The  V_228.csv  file contains the traffic speed collected by the 228 sensor stations, and  W_228.csv  stores the distances between  these stations. 
 Let’s load them using  pandas . We will rename the columns using  range()  for  easy access: 
 
import pandas as pd
speeds = pd.read_csv('PeMSD7_V_228.csv', names=range(0,228))
distances = pd.read_csv('PeMSD7_W_228.csv.csv', names=range(0,228)) 
 The first thing we want to do with this dataset is to visualize the evolution of traffic speed. This is a classic in time series forecasting since characteristics such as seasonality can be extremely helpful. On the other hand, non-stationary time series might need further processing before they can  be used. 
 Let’s plot the traffic speed over time  using  matplotlib : 
 
 We import  NumPy   and  matplotlib : 
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt 
 We  use  plt.plot()  to create a line plot for every row in  our DataFrame: 
plt.figure(figsize=(10,5))
plt.plot(speeds)
plt.grid(linestyle=':')
plt.xlabel('Time (5 min)')
plt.ylabel('Traffic speed') 
 We obtain the  following plot: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 15.2 – Traffic speed over time for each of the 228 sensor stations 
 Unfortunately, the data is too noisy to give us any insight using this approach. Instead, we could plot the data corresponding to a few sensor stations. However, it might not be representative of the entire dataset. There is another option: we can plot the mean traffic speed with standard deviation. That way, we can visualize a summary of  the dataset. 
 In practice, we would use both approaches, but let’s try the second  option now: 
 
 We  calculate the mean traffic speed with the corresponding standard deviation for each column ( time step): 
mean = speeds.mean(axis=1)
std = speeds.std(axis=1) 
 We plot the mean values in black with a  solid line: 
plt.plot(mean, 'k-') 
 We plot the standard deviation around the mean values using  plt.fill_between()  in  light red: 
plt.fill_between(mean.index, mean-std, mean+std, color='r', alpha=0.1)
plt.grid(linestyle=':')
plt.xlabel('Time (5 min)')
plt.ylabel('Traffic speed') 
 The code generates the  following plot: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 15.3 – Mean traffic speed over time with a standard deviation 
 This figure is much more comprehensible. We can see a clear seasonality (pattern) in the time series data, except around the 5,800 th  data sample. The traffic speed has a lot of variability with important spikes. This is understandable because the sensor stations are spread throughout District 7 of California: traffic might be jammed for some sensors but not  for others. 
 We can  verify that by plotting the correlation between the speed values from every sensor. In addition to that, we can compare it with the distances between each station. Stations close to each other should display similar values more often than  distant ones. 
 Let’s compare these two plots on the  same figure: 
 
 We create a figure with two horizontal subplots and some padding  between them: 
fig, (ax1, ax2) = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(8, 8))
fig.tight_layout(pad=3.0) 
 First, we use the  matshow()  function to plot the  distance matrix: 
ax1.matshow(distances)
ax1.set_xlabel("Sensor station")
ax1.set_ylabel("Sensor station")
ax1.title.set_text("Distance matrix") 
 Then, we calculate the Pearson correlation coefficients for each sensor station. We must transpose the speed matrix or we will get the correlation coefficients for each time step instead. Finally, we invert them, so the two plots are easier  to compare: 
ax2.matshow(-np.corrcoef(speeds.T))
ax2.set_xlabel("Sensor station")
ax2.set_ylabel("Sensor station")
ax2.title.set_text("Correlation matrix") 
 We obtain the  following plot: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 15.4 – Distance and correlation matrices with darker colors representing short distances and high correlation, while brighter colors represent long distances and low correlation 
 Interestingly, long  distances between stations do not mean they are not highly correlated (and vice versa). This is particularly important if we only consider a subset of this dataset: close stations might have very different outputs, making traffic forecasting more difficult. In this chapter, we will take into account every sensor station in  the dataset. 
 Processing the dataset 
 Now that we have more information about this dataset, it is time to process it before we can feed it to  a T-GNN. 
 The first  step consists of transforming the tabular dataset into a temporal graph. So, first, we need to create a graph from the raw data. In other words, we must connect the different sensor stations in a meaningful way. Fortunately, we have access to the distance matrix, which should be a good way to connect  the stations. 
 There are several options to compute the adjacency matrix from the distance matrix. For example, we could assign a link when the distance between two stations is inferior to the mean distance. Instead, we will perform a more advanced processing introduced in [2] to calculate a weighted adjacency matrix. Instead of binary values, we calculate weights between 0 (no connection) and 1 (strong connection) using the  following formula: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   represents  the weight of the edge from node   to node  ,   is the distance between these two nodes, and   and   are two thresholds to control the distribution and sparsity of the adjacency matrix. The official implementation of [2] is available on GitHub ( https://github.com/VeritasYin/STGCN_IJCAI-18 ). We will reuse the same threshold values    and  . 
 Let’s implement it in Python and plot the resulting  adjacency matrix: 
 
 We create a function to compute the adjacency matrix that takes three parameters: the distance matrix and the two thresholds   and  . Like in the official implementation, we divide the distances by 10,000 and  calculate  : 
def compute_adj(distances, sigma2=0.1, epsilon=0.5):
    d = distances.to_numpy() / 10000.
    d2 = d * d 
 Here, we  want weights when their values are greater than or equal to   (otherwise, they should be equal to zero). When we test whether the weights are greater than or equal to  , the results are  True  or  False  statements. This is why we need a mask of ones ( w_mask ) to convert it back into 0 and 1 values. We multiply it a second time so that we only obtain the real values of weights that are greater than or equal  to  : 
    n = distances.shape[0]
    w_mask = np.ones([n, n]) - np.identity(n)
    return np.exp(-d2 / sigma2) * (np.exp(-d2 / sigma2) >= epsilon) * w_mask 
 Let’s compute our adjacency matrix and print the result for  one line: 
adj = compute_adj(distances)
adj[0]
 array([0.       , 0.       , 0.        , 0.       , 0.  , 
        0.       , 0.       , 0.61266012, 0.       , ... 
 
 We can see a value of  0.61266012 , representing the weight of the edge from node 1 to  node 2. 
 
 A more  efficient way to visualize this matrix is to use  matplotlib ’s  matshow  again: 
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 8))
cax = plt.matshow(adj, False)
plt.colorbar(cax)
plt.xlabel("Sensor station")
plt.ylabel("Sensor station") 
 
 We get the  following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 15.5 – The PeMS-M dataset’s weighted adjacency matrix 
 This is a great way to summarize this first processing step. We can compare it to the distance matrix we previously plotted to  find similarities. 
 
 We can also  directly plot it as a graph using  networkx . In this case, connections are binary, so we can simply consider every weight higher than 0. We could display these values using edge labels, but the graph would be extremely difficult  to read: 
import networkx as nx
def plot_graph(adj):
    plt.figure(figsize=(10,5))
    rows, cols = np.where(adj > 0)
    edges = zip(rows.tolist(), cols.tolist())
    G = nx.Graph()
    G.add_edges_from(edges)
    nx.draw(G, with_labels=True)
    plt.show() 
 Even without labels, the resulting graph is not easy  to read: 
plot_graph(adj) 
 
 It gives us the  following output: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 15.6 – The PeMS-M dataset as a graph (every node represents a sensor station) 
 Indeed, many nodes are  interconnected because they are very close to each other. Yet, despite that, we can distinguish several branches that could correspond to  actual roads. 
 Now that we have a graph, we can focus on the time series aspect of this problem. The first step consists of normalizing the speed values so they can be fed to a neural network. In the traffic forecasting literature, many authors choose a z-score normalization (or standardization), which we will  implement here: 
 
 We create a function to  calculate z-scores: 
def zscore(x, mean, std):
    return (x - mean) / std 
 We apply it to our dataset to create a normalized version  of it: 
speeds_norm = zscore(speeds, speeds.mean(axis=0), speeds.std(axis=0)) 
 We can check  the result: 
speeds_norm.head(1) 
 
 We get the  following output: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 5 
 
 
 6 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 0.950754 
 
 
 0.548255 
 
 
 0.502211 
 
 
 0.831672 
 
 
 0.793696 
 
 
 1.193806 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 15.7 – An example of standardized speed values 
 These values are correctly standardized. Now, we can use them to create time series for each node. We want   input data samples at each time step,  , to predict the speed value at  . A high number of input data samples also increases the memory footprint of the dataset. The  value for  , also called the horizon, depends on the task we want to perform: short-term or long-term  traffic forecasting. 
 In this example, let’s take a high value of 48 to predict the traffic speed in  4 hours: 
 
 We initialize the variables: the number of  lags  (number of input data samples),  horizon , the input matrix, and the  ground-truth matrix: 
lags = 24
horizon = 48
xs = []
ys = [] 
 For each time step  , we store the 12 (lags) previous values in  xs  and the value at    in  ys : 
for i in range(lags, speeds_norm.shape[0]-horizon):
    xs.append(speeds_norm.to_numpy()[i-lags:i].T)
    ys.append(speeds_norm.to_numpy()[i+horizon-1]) 
 Finally, we  can create the temporal graph using PyTorch Geometric Temporal. We need to give the edge index in COO format and the edge weight from the weighted  adjacency matrix: 
from torch_geometric_temporal.signal import StaticGraphTemporalSignal
edge_index = (np.array(adj) > 0).nonzero()
edge_weight = adj[adj > 0]
dataset = StaticGraphTemporalSignal(edge_index, adj[adj > 0], xs, ys) 
 Let’s print information about the first graph to see whether everything  looks good: 
dataset[0]
 Data(x=[228, 12], edge_index=[2, 1664], edge_attr=[1664], y=[228]) 
 Let’s not forget the train/test split to finalize  our dataset: 
from torch_geometric_temporal.signal import temporal_signal_split
train_dataset, test_dataset = temporal_signal_split(dataset, train_ratio=0.8) 
 
 The final temporal graph  has 228 nodes with 12 values and 1,664 connections. We are now ready to apply a T-GNN to  predict traffic. 
 Implementing the A3T-GCN architecture 
 In this section, we will train an  Attention Temporal Graph Convolutional Network  ( A3T-GCN ), designed  for traffic forecasting. This architecture allows us to consider complex spatial and  temporal dependencies: 
 
 Spatial dependencies refer to the fact that the traffic condition of a location can be influenced by the traffic condition of nearby locations. For example, traffic jams often spread to  neighboring roads. 
 Temporal dependencies refer to the fact that the traffic condition of a location at a time can be influenced by the traffic condition of the same location at previous times. For example, if a road is congested during the morning peak, it is likely to remain congested until the  evening peak. 
 
 A3T-GCN is an improvement over the  temporal GCN  ( TGCN ) architecture. The TGCN is a combination of a GCN and GRU that  produces hidden vectors from each input time series. The combination of these two layers captures spatial and temporal information from the input. An attention model is then used to calculate weights and output a context vector. The final prediction is based on the resulting context vector. The addition of this attention model is motivated by the need to understand  global trends. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 15.8 – The A3T-GCN framework 
 We will now implement it using the PyTorch Geometric  Temporal library: 
 
 First, we import the  required libraries: 
import torch
from torch_geometric_temporal.nn.recurrent import A3TGCN 
 We  create a T-GNN with an  A3TGCN  layer and a linear layer with 32 hidden dimensions. The  edge_attr  parameter will store our  edge weights: 
class TemporalGNN(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_in, periods):
        super().__init__()
        self.tgnn = A3TGCN(in_channels=dim_in, out_channels=32, periods=periods)
        self.linear = torch.nn.Linear(32, periods)
    def forward(self, x, edge_index, edge_attr):
        h = self.tgnn(x, edge_index, edge_attr).relu()
        h = self.linear(h)
        return h 
 We instantiate the T-GNN and the  Adam  optimizer with a learning rate of  0.005 . Due to implementation details, we will train this model using a CPU instead of a GPU, which is faster in  this case: 
model = TemporalGNN(lags, 1).to('cpu')
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.005) 
 We train the model for 30 epochs using  the  Mean Squared Error  ( MSE ) as the  loss  function. The  loss  value is backpropagated after  each epoch: 
model.train()
for epoch in range(30):
    loss = 0
    step = 0
    for i, snapshot in enumerate(train_dataset):
        y_pred = model(snapshot.x.unsqueeze(2), snapshot.edge_index, snapshot.edge_attr)
        loss += torch.mean((y_pred-snapshot.y)**2)
        step += 1
    loss = loss / (step + 1)
    loss.backward()
    optimizer.step()
    optimizer.zero_grad()
    if epoch % 10 == 0:
        print(f"Epoch {epoch+1:>2} | Train MSE: {loss:.4f}") 
 We  obtain the  following output: 
 Epoch  1 | Train MSE: 1.0209 
 Epoch 10 | Train MSE: 0.9625 
 Epoch 20 | Train MSE: 0.9143 
 Epoch 30 | Train MSE: 0.8905 
 
 Now that our model is trained, we have to evaluate it. Beyond classic  metrics such as  Root Mean Squared Error  ( RMSE ) and  Mean Absolute Error  ( MAE ), it is particularly  helpful to compare our model to a baseline solution with time series data. In the following list, we will introduce  two methods: 
 
 Using  Random Walk  ( RW ) as a  naïve forecaster. In this case, RW refers to using the last  observation as the predicted value. In other words, the value at   is the same one as  at  . 
 Using  Historical Average  ( HA ) as  a slightly more evolved solution. In this case, we calculate the mean traffic speed of   previous samples as the value at  . In this example, we will use the number of lags as our   value, but we could also take the overall  historical average. 
 
 Let’s start by evaluating the model’s predictions on the  test set: 
 
 We create a function to invert the z-score and get back to the  original values: 
def inverse_zscore(x, mean, std):
    return x * std + mean 
 We use it to recalculate the speeds we want to predict from their normalized values. The following loop is not very efficient, but it is clearer to understand than more  optimized code: 
y_test = []
for snapshot in test_dataset:
    y_hat = snapshot.y.numpy()
    y_hat = inverse_zscore(y_hat, speeds.mean(axis=0), speeds.std(axis=0))
    y_test = np.append(y_test, y_hat) 
 We apply the same strategy to the predictions made by  the GNN: 
gnn_pred = []
model.eval()
for snapshot in test_dataset:
    y_hat = model(snapshot.x.unsqueeze(2), snapshot.edge_index, snapshot.edge_weight).squeeze().detach().numpy()
    y_hat = inverse_zscore(y_hat, speeds.mean(axis=0), speeds.std(axis=0))
    gnn_pred = np.append(gnn_pred, y_hat) 
 We do  the same thing for the RW and  HA techniques: 
rw_pred = []
for snapshot in test_dataset:
    y_hat = snapshot.x[:,-1].squeeze().detach().numpy()
    y_hat = inverse_zscore(y_hat, speeds.mean(axis=0), speeds.std(axis=0))
    rw_pred = np.append(rw_pred, y_hat)
ha_pred = []
for i in range(lags, speeds_norm.shape[0]-horizon):
    y_hat = speeds_norm.to_numpy()[i-lags:i].T.mean(axis=1)
    y_hat = inverse_zscore(y_hat, speeds.mean(axis=0), speeds.std(axis=0))
    ha_pred.append(y_hat)
ha_pred = np.array(ha_pred).flatten()[-len(y_test):] 
 We create  functions to calculate the  MAE, RMSE, and the  Mean Absolute Percentage  Error  ( MAPE ): 
def MAE(real, pred):
    return np.mean(np.abs(pred - real))
def RMSE(real, pred):
    return np.sqrt(np.mean((pred - real) ** 2))
def MAPE(real, pred):
    return np.mean(np.abs(pred - real) / (real + 1e-5)) 
 We evaluate the GNN’s predictions in the following block and repeat this process for  every technique: 
print(f'GNN MAE  = {MAE(gnn_pred, y_test):.4f}')
print(f'GNN RMSE = {RMSE(gnn_pred, y_test):.4f}')
print(f'GNN MAPE = {MAPE(gnn_pred, y_test):.4f}') 
 
 In the end, we obtain the  following table: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RMSE 
 
 
 MAE 
 
 
 MAPE 
 
 
 
 
 A3T-GCN 
 
 
 11.9396 
 
 
 8.3293 
 
 
 14.95% 
 
 
 
 
 Random Walk 
 
 
 17.6501 
 
 
 11.0469 
 
 
 29.99% 
 
 
 
 
 Historical Average 
 
 
 17.9009 
 
 
 11.7308 
 
 
 28.93% 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 15.9 – Output table of predictions 
 We see that the  baseline techniques are outperformed by the A3T-GCN model in every metric. This is an important result because baselines can often be difficult to beat. It would be interesting to compare these metrics to the predictions provided by LSTM or GRU networks to measure the importance of the  topological information. 
 Finally, we can plot the mean predictions to obtain a visualization that is similar to  Figure 15 .3 : 
 
 We obtain the mean predictions using a list comprehension that is a little faster than the previous method (but harder  to read): 
y_preds = [inverse_zscore(model(snapshot.x.unsqueeze(2), snapshot.edge_index, snapshot.edge_weight).squeeze().detach().numpy(), speeds.mean(axis=0), speeds.std(axis=0)).mean() for snapshot in test_dataset] 
 We calculate the mean and standard deviation of the  original dataset: 
mean = speeds.mean(axis=1)
std = speeds.std(axis=1) 
 We plot the mean traffic speed with standard deviation and compare it to the predicted values (   hours): 
plt.figure(figsize=(10,5), dpi=300)
plt.plot(mean, 'k-', label='Mean')
plt.plot(range(len(speeds)-len(y_preds), len(speeds)), y_preds, 'r-', label='Prediction')
plt.grid(linestyle=':')
plt.fill_between(mean.index, mean-std, mean+std, color='r', alpha=0.1)
plt.axvline(x=len(speeds)-len(y_preds), color='b', linestyle='--')
plt.xlabel('Time (5 min)')
plt.ylabel('Traffic speed to predict')
plt.legend(loc='upper right') 
 
 We  obtain the  following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 15.10 – Mean traffic speeds predicted by the A3T-GCN model on the test set 
 The T-GNN  correctly predicts spikes and follows the general trend. However, the predicted speeds are closer to the overall average value, as it is more costly for the model to make serious mistakes due to the MSE loss. Despite that, the GNN is quite accurate and could be fine-tuned to output more  extreme values. 
 Summary 
 This chapter focused on a traffic forecasting task using T-GNNs. First, we explored the PeMS-M dataset and converted it from tabular data into a static graph dataset with a temporal signal. In practice, we created a weighted adjacency matrix based on the input distance matrix and converted the traffic speeds into time series. Finally, we implemented an A3T-GCN model, a T-GNN designed for traffic forecasting. We compared the results to two baselines and validated the predictions made by  our model. 
 In  Chapter 16 , Building a Recommender System Using LightGCN , we will see the most popular application of GNNs. We will implement a lightweight GNN on a massive dataset and evaluate it using techniques from  recommender systems. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu.  Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolutional Networks: A Deep Learning Framework for Traffic Forecasting . Jul. 2018. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2018/505. Available  at  https://arxiv.org/abs/1709.04875 . 
 [2] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu.  Diffusion Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network: Data-Driven Traffic Forecasting . arXiv, 2017. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1707.01926. Available  at  https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.01926 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 16 
 Detecting Anomalies Using Heterogeneous GNNs 
 In machine learning, anomaly detection  is a popular task that aims to identify patterns or observations in data that deviate from the expected behavior. This is a fundamental problem that arises in many real-world applications, such as detecting fraud in financial transactions, identifying defective products in a manufacturing process, and detecting cyber attacks in a  computer network. 
 GNNs can be trained to learn the normal behavior of a network and then identify nodes or patterns that deviate from that behavior. Indeed, their ability to understand complex relationships makes them particularly appropriate to detect weak signals. Additionally, GNNs can be scaled to large datasets, making them an efficient tool for processing large amounts  of data. 
 In this chapter, we will build a GNN application for anomaly detection in computer networks. First, we will introduce the  CIDDS-001  dataset, which contains attacks and benign traffic in a computer network. Next, we will process the dataset, preparing it for input into GNNs. We will then move on to implementing a heterogenous GNN to handle different types of nodes and edges. Finally, we will train the network using the processed dataset and evaluate the results to see how well it detects anomalies in the  network traffic. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will know how to implement a GNN for intrusion detection. In addition, you will know how to build relevant features to detect attacks and process them to feed them to a GNN. Finally, you will learn how to implement and evaluate a heterogenous GNN to detect  rare attacks. 
 In this chapter, we will cover the following  main topics: 
 
 Exploring the  CIDDS-001 dataset 
 Preprocessing the  CIDDS-001 dataset 
 Implementing a  heterogeneous GNN 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub  at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter16 . 
 The installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  of this book. This chapter requires a large amount of GPU. You can lower it by decreasing the size of the training set in  the code. 
 Exploring the CIDDS-001 dataset 
 This section will explore the dataset and get more insights about feature importance  and scaling. 
 The  CIDDS-001  dataset [1] is designed  to train and evaluate anomaly-based network intrusion detection systems. It provides realistic traffic that includes up-to-date attacks to assess these systems. It was created by collecting and labeling 8,451,520 traffic flows in a virtual environment using OpenStack. Precisely, each row corresponds to a NetFlow connection, describing  Internet Protocol  ( IP ) traffic statistics, such as the number of  bytes exchanged. 
 The following figure provides an overview of the simulated network environment  in  CIDDS-001 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 16.1 – Overview of the virtual network simulated by CIDDS-001 
 We see four  different subnets (developer, office, management, and server) with their respective IP address ranges. All these subnets are linked to a single server connected to the internet through a firewall. An external server is also present and provides two services: a file synchronization service and a web server. Finally, attackers are represented outside of the  local network. 
 Connections in  CIDDS-001  were collected from the local and external servers. The goal of this dataset is to correctly classify these connections into five categories: benign (no attack), brute-force, denial of service, ping scan, and  port scan. 
 Let’s download the  CIDDS-001  dataset and explore its  input features: 
 
 We  download  CIDDS-001 : 
from io import BytesIO
from urllib.request import urlopen
from zipfile import ZipFile
url = 'https://www.hs-coburg.de/fileadmin/hscoburg/WISENT-CIDDS-001.zip'
with urlopen(url) as zurl:
    with ZipFile(BytesIO(zurl.read())) as zfile:
        zfile.extractall('.') 
 We  import the  required libraries: 
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import itertools
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from sklearn.preprocessing import PowerTransformer
from sklearn.metrics import f1_score, classification_report, confusion_matrix
from torch_geometric.loader import DataLoader
from torch_geometric.data import HeteroData
from torch.nn import functional as F
from torch.optim import Adam
from torch import nn
import torch 
 We load the dataset  using  pandas : 
df = pd.read_csv("CIDDS-001/traffic/OpenStack/CIDDS-001-internal-week1.csv") 
 Let’s look  at the data corresponding to the first  five connections: 
df.head(5)
 Date first seen Duration Proto Src IP Addr Src Pt Dst IP Addr Dst Pt Packets Bytes Flows Flags Tos class attackType attackID attackDescription 
 2017-03-15 00:01:16.632 0.000 TCP 192.168.100.5 445 192.168.220.16 58844.0 1 108 1 .AP... 0 normal --- --- --- 
 2017-03-15 00:01:16.552 0.000 TCP 192.168.100.5 445 192.168.220.15 48888.0 1 108 1 .AP... 0 normal --- --- --- 
 2017-03-15 00:01:16.551 0.004 TCP 192.168.220.15 48888 192.168.100.5 445.0 2 174 1 .AP... 0 normal --- --- --- 
 2017-03-15 00:01:16.631 0.004 TCP 192.168.220.16 58844 192.168.100.5 445.0 2 174 1 .AP... 0 normal --- --- --- 
 2017-03-15 00:01:16.552 0.000 TCP 192.168.100.5 445 192.168.220.15 48888.0 1 108 1 .AP... 0 normal --- --- --- 
 
 There are a few interesting features we can use for  our model: 
 
 The date first seen is a timestamp we can process to extract information about the day of the week and the time of day. In general, network traffic is seasonal, and connections that occur at night or on unusual days  are suspicious. 
 IP addresses (such as  192.168.100.5 ) are notoriously difficult to process because they are not numerical values and follow a complex set of rules. We could bin them into a few categories since we know how our local network is set up. Another popular and more generalizable solution is to convert them into a binary representation (“192”  becomes “11000000”). 
 Duration, the number of packets, and the number of bytes are features that usually display heavy-tailed distributions. Therefore, they will require special processing if that is  the case. 
 
 Let’s check this  last point and look closely at the distribution of attacks in  this dataset: 
 
 We start by removing features we will not consider in this project: ports, the number of flows, type of service, class, attack ID, and  attack description: 
df = df.drop(columns=['Src Pt', 'Dst Pt', 'Flows', 'Tos', 'class', 'attackID', 'attackDescription']) 
 We rename the benign class and convert the “date first seen” feature into the timestamp  data type: 
df['attackType'] = df['attackType'].replace('---', 'benign')
df['Date first seen'] = pd.to_datetime(df['Date first seen']) 
 We count the labels and make a pie chart with the three most represented classes (the two others are  under 0.1%): 
count_labels = df['attackType'].value_counts() / len(df) * 100
plt.pie(count_labels[:3], labels=df['attackType'].unique()[:3], autopct='%.0f%%') 
 We obtain the  following plot: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 16.2 – Proportion of each class in the CIDDS-001 dataset 
 As you can  see, benign traffic represents the immense majority of this dataset. On the contrary, brute-force attacks and ping scans have very few samples in comparison. This imbalanced learning setting could negatively impact the model’s performance when dealing with  rare classes. 
 
 Finally, we can display the duration distribution, number of packets, and number of bytes. This allows us to see whether they really need a specific  rescaling process: 
fig, ((ax1, ax2, ax3)) = plt.subplots(1, 3, figsize=(20,5))
df['Duration'].hist(ax=ax1)
ax1.set_xlabel("Duration")
df['Packets'].hist(ax=ax2)
ax2.set_xlabel("Number of packets")
pd.to_numeric(df['Bytes'], errors='coerce').hist(ax=ax3)
ax3.set_xlabel("Number of bytes")
plt.show() 
 
 It outputs the  following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 16.3 – Distributions of duration, the number of packets, and number of bytes 
 We can see that most  values are close to zero, but there is also a long tail of rare values stretching along the  x  axes. We will use a power transform to make these features more Gaussian-like, which should help the model  during training. 
 Now that we have explored the main characteristics of the  CIDDS-001  dataset, we can move on to the  preprocessing stage. 
 Preprocessing the CIDDS-001 dataset 
 In the last section, we identified some  issues with the dataset we need to address to improve the accuracy of  our model. 
 The  CIDDS-001  dataset includes diverse types of data: we have numerical values such as duration, categorical features such as protocols (TCP, UDP, ICMP, and IGMP), and others such as timestamps or IP addresses. In the following exercise, we will choose how to represent these data types based on the information from the previous section and  expert knowledge: 
 
 First, we can one-hot-encode the day of the week by retrieving this information from the timestamp. We will rename the resulting columns to make them  more readable: 
df['weekday'] = df['Date first seen'].dt.weekday
df = pd.get_dummies(df, columns=['weekday']).rename(columns = {'weekday_0': 'Monday','weekday_1': 'Tuesday','weekday_2': 'Wednesday', 'weekday_3': 'Thursday','weekday_4': 'Friday','weekday_5': 'Saturday','weekday_6': 'Sunday',}) 
 Another important type of information we can get using timestamps is the time of day. We also normalize it between  0   and  1 : 
df['daytime'] = (df['Date first seen'].dt.second +df['Date first seen'].dt.minute*60 + df['Date first seen'].dt.hour*60*60)/(24*60*60) 
 We have not talked about TCP flags yet. Each flag indicates a particular state during a TCP connection. For example,  F  or  FIN  signifies that the TCP peer has finished sending data. We can extract each flag, and one-hot-encode them  as follows: 
df = df.reset_index(drop=True)
ohe_flags = one_hot_flags(df['Flags'].to_numpy())
ohe_flags = df['Flags'].apply(one_hot_flags).to_list()
df[['ACK', 'PSH', 'RST', 'SYN', 'FIN']] = pd.DataFrame(ohe_flags, columns=['ACK', 'PSH', 'RST', 'SYN', 'FIN']) 
 Let’s now  process the IP addresses. In this example, we will use binary encoding. Instead of taking 32 bits to encode the complete IPv4 address, we will only keep the last 16 bits, which are the most significant here. Indeed, the 16 first bits either correspond to  192.168  if the host belongs to the internal network or another value if  it’s external: 
temp = pd.DataFrame()
temp['SrcIP'] = df['Src IP Addr'].astype(str)
temp['SrcIP'][~temp['SrcIP'].str.contains('\d{1,3}\.', regex=True)] = '0.0.0.0'
temp = temp['SrcIP'].str.split('.', expand=True).rename(columns = {2: 'ipsrc3', 3: 'ipsrc4'}).astype(int)[['ipsrc3', 'ipsrc4']]
temp['ipsrc'] = temp['ipsrc3'].apply(lambda x: format(x, "b").zfill(8)) + temp['ipsrc4'].apply(lambda x: format(x, "b").zfill(8))
df = df.join(temp['ipsrc'].str.split('', expand=True)
            .drop(columns=[0, 17])
            .rename(columns=dict(enumerate([f'ipsrc_{i}' for i in range(17)])))
            .astype('int32')) 
 We repeat this process for destination  IP addresses: 
temp = pd.DataFrame()
temp['DstIP'] = df['Dst IP Addr'].astype(str)
temp['DstIP'][~temp['DstIP'].str.contains('\d{1,3}\.', regex=True)] = '0.0.0.0'
temp = temp['DstIP'].str.split('.', expand=True).rename(columns = {2: 'ipdst3', 3: 'ipdst4'}).astype(int)[['ipdst3', 'ipdst4']]
temp['ipdst'] = temp['ipdst3'].apply(lambda x: format(x, "b").zfill(8)) + temp['ipdst4'].apply(lambda x: format(x, "b").zfill(8))
df = df.join(temp['ipdst'].str.split('', expand=True)
            .drop(columns=[0, 17])
            .rename(columns=dict(enumerate([f'ipdst_{i}' for i in range(17)])))
            .astype('int32')) 
 There is an  issue with the ‘ Bytes ’ feature: millions are represented as  m  instead of a numerical value. We can fix it by multiplying the numerical part of these non-numerical values by  one million: 
m_index = df[pd.to_numeric(df['Bytes'], errors='coerce').isnull() == True].index
df['Bytes'].loc[m_index] = df['Bytes'].loc[m_index].apply(lambda x: 10e6 * float(x.strip().split()[0]))
df['Bytes'] = pd.to_numeric(df['Bytes'], errors='coerce', downcast='integer') 
 The last features we need to encode are the easiest ones: categorical features such as protocols and attack types. We use the  get_dummies()  function  from  pandas : 
df = pd.get_dummies(df, prefix='', prefix_sep='', columns=['Proto', 'attackType']) 
 We create a train/validation/test split with  80/10/10 ratios: 
labels = ['benign', 'bruteForce', 'dos', 'pingScan', 'portScan']
df_train, df_test = train_test_split(df, random_state=0, test_size=0.2, stratify=df[labels])
df_val, df_test = train_test_split(df_test, random_state=0, test_size=0.5, stratify=df_test[labels]) 
 Finally, we need to  address the scaling of three features: duration, the number of packets, and the number of bytes. We use  PowerTransformer()  from  scikit-learn  to modify  their distributions: 
scaler = PowerTransformer()
df_train[['Duration', 'Packets', 'Bytes']] = scaler.fit_transform(df_train[['Duration', 'Packets', 'Bytes']])
df_val[['Duration', 'Packets', 'Bytes']] = scaler.transform(df_val[['Duration', 'Packets', 'Bytes']])
df_test[['Duration', 'Packets', 'Bytes']] = scaler.transform(df_test[['Duration', 'Packets', 'Bytes']]) 
 Let’s plot the new distributions to see how  they compare: 
fig, ((ax1, ax2, ax3)) = plt.subplots(1, 3, figsize=(15,5))
df_train['Duration'].hist(ax=ax1)
ax1.set_xlabel("Duration")
df_train['Packets'].hist(ax=ax2)
ax2.set_xlabel("Number of packets")
df_train['Bytes'].hist(ax=ax3)
ax3.set_xlabel("Number of bytes")
plt.show() 
 
 We obtain the  following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 16.4 – Rescaled distributions of duration, the number of packets, and the number of bytes 
 These new distributions  are not Gaussian, but the values are more spread out, which should help  the model. 
 Note that the dataset we processed is purely tabular. We still need to convert it into a graph dataset before we can feed it to a GNN. In our case, there is no obvious way of converting our traffic flows into nodes. Ideally, flows between the same computers should be connected. This can be achieved using a heterogeneous graph with two types  of nodes: 
 
 Hosts , which  correspond to computers and use IP addresses as features. If we had more information, we could add other computer-related features, such as logs or  CPU utilization. 
 Flows , which  correspond to connections between two hosts. They consider all the other features from the dataset. They also have the label we want to predict (a benign or  malicious flow). 
 
 In this example, flows are unidirectional, which is why we also define two types of edges: host-to-flow (source), and flow-to-host (destination). A single graph would require too much memory, so we will divide it into subgraphs and place them into  data loaders: 
 
 We define the  batch size and the features we want to consider for host and  flow nodes: 
BATCH_SIZE = 16
features_host = [f'ipsrc_{i}' for i in range(1, 17)] + [f'ipdst_{i}' for i in range(1, 17)]
features_flow = ['daytime', 'Monday', 'Tuesday', 'Wednesday', 'Thursday', 'Friday', 'Duration', 'Packets', 'Bytes', 'ACK', 'PSH', 'RST', 'SYN', 'FIN', 'ICMP ', 'IGMP ', 'TCP  ', 'UDP  '] 
 We define the function that will create our data loaders. It takes two parameters: the tabular DataFrame we created, and the subgraph size ( 1024  nodes in  this example): 
def create_dataloader(df, subgraph_size=1024): 
 We initialize a list called  data  to store our subgraphs, and we count the number of subgraphs we  will create: 
    data = []
    n_subgraphs = len(df) // subgraph_size 
 For each subgraph, we retrieve the corresponding samples in the DataFrame, the list of source IP addresses, and the list of destination  IP addresses: 
    for i in range(1, n_batches+1):
        subgraph = df[(i-1)*subgraph_size:i*subgraph_size]
        src_ip = subgraph['Src IP Addr'].to_numpy()
        dst_ip = subgraph['Dst IP Addr'].to_numpy() 
 We create a dictionary that maps the IP addresses to a  node index: 
ip_map = {ip:index for index, ip in enumerate(np.unique(np.append(src_ip, dst_ip)))} 
 This dictionary will help us to create the edge index from the host to the flow and vice versa. We use a function called  get_connections() , which we will create after  this one. 
host_to_flow, flow_to_host = get_connections(ip_map, src_ip, dst_ip) 
 We use all  the data we have collected so far to create a heterogeneous graph for each subgraph and append it to  the list: 
        batch = HeteroData()
        batch['host'].x = torch.Tensor(subgraph[features_host].to_numpy()).float()
        batch['flow'].x = torch.Tensor(subgraph[features_flow].to_numpy()).float()
        batch['flow'].y = torch.Tensor(subgraph[labels].to_numpy()).float()
        batch['host','flow'].edge_index = host_to_flow
        batch['flow','host'].edge_index = flow_to_host
        data.append(batch) 
 Finally, we return the data loader with the appropriate  batch size: 
return DataLoader(data, batch_size=BATCH_SIZE) 
 There is one function we still need to implement –  get_connections()  – which calculates two edge indices from the list of source and destination IP addresses and their  corresponding map: 
def get_connections(ip_map, src_ip, dst_ip): 
 We get indexes from the IP addresses (both source and destination) and  stack them: 
    src1 = [ip_map[ip] for ip in src_ip]
    src2 = [ip_map[ip] for ip in dst_ip]
    src = np.column_stack((src1, src2)).flatten() 
 The connections are unique, so we can easily index them with the appropriate range  of numbers: 
    dst = list(range(len(src_ip)))
    dst = np.column_stack((dst, dst)).flatten() 
 Finally, we return the two following  edge indexes: 
return torch.Tensor([src, dst]).int(), torch.Tensor([dst, src]).int() 
 Now that we have everything we need, we can call the first function to create the training, validation, and test  data loaders: 
train_loader = create_dataloader(df_train)
val_loader = create_dataloader(df_val)
test_loader = create_dataloader(df_test) 
 We now have  three data loaders corresponding to our training, validation, and test sets. The next step consists of implementing the  GNN model. 
 
 Implementing a heterogeneous GNN 
 In this section, we  will implement a heterogeneous GNN using a  GraphSAGE  operator. This architecture will allow us to consider both node types (hosts and flows) to build better embeddings. This is done by duplicating and sharing messages across different layers, as shown in the  following figure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 16.5 – Architecture of the heterogeneous GNN 
 We will implement  three layers of  SAGEConv  with  LeakyRELU  for each node type. Finally, a linear layer will output a five-dimensional vector, where each dimension corresponds to a class. Furthermore, we will train this model in a supervised way using the cross-entropy loss and the  Adam  optimizer: 
 
 We import the relevant neural network layers from  PyTorch Geometric: 
import torch_geometric.transforms as T
from torch_geometric.nn import Linear, HeteroConv, SAGEConv 
 We define the heterogeneous GNN with three parameters: the number of hidden dimensions, the number of output dimensions, and the number  of layers: 
class HeteroGNN(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim_h, dim_out, num_layers):
        super().__init__() 
 We define a  heterogenous version of the  GraphSAGE  operator for each layer and edge type. Here, we could apply a different GNN layer to each edge type, such as  GCNConv  or  GATConv . The  HeteroConv()  wrapper manages the messages between layers, as shown in  Figure 16 .5 : 
        self.convs = torch.nn.ModuleList()
        for _ in range(num_layers):
            conv = HeteroConv({
                ('host', 'to', 'flow'): SAGEConv((-1,-1), dim_h, add_self_loops=False),
                ('flow', 'to', 'host'): SAGEConv((-1,-1), dim_h, add_self_loops=False),
            }, aggr='sum')
            self.convs.append(conv) 
 We define a linear layer that will output the  final classification: 
        self.lin = Linear(dim_h, dim_out) 
 We create the  forward()  method, which computes embeddings for host and flow nodes (stored in the  x_dict  dictionary). The flow embeddings are then used to predict  a class: 
    def forward(self, x_dict, edge_index_dict):
        for conv in self.convs:
            x_dict = conv(x_dict, edge_index_dict)
            x_dict = {key: F.leaky_relu(x) for key, x in x_dict.items()}
        return self.lin(x_dict['flow']) 
 We instantiate the heterogeneous GNN with 64 hidden dimensions, 5 outputs (our 5 classes), and 3 layers. If available, we place it on a GPU and create an  Adam  optimizer with a learning rate  of  0.001 : 
device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
model = HeteroGNN(dim_h=64, dim_out=5, num_layers=3).to(device)
optimizer = Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.001) 
 We define  the  test()  function and create arrays to store predictions and  true  labels. We also want to count the number of subgraphs and the total loss, so we create the  corresponding variables: 
@torch.no_grad()
def test(loader):
    model.eval()
    y_pred = []
    y_true = []
    n_subgraphs = 0
    total_loss = 0 
 We get the model’s prediction for each batch and compute the  cross-entropy loss: 
   for batch in loader:
        batch.to(device)
        out = model(batch.x_dict, batch.edge_index_dict)
        loss = F.cross_entropy(out, batch['flow'].y.float()) 
 We append the predicted class to the list of predictions and do the same with the  true  labels: 
        y_pred.append(out.argmax(dim=1))
        y_true.append(batch['flow'].y.argmax(dim=1)) 
 We count the number of subgraphs and the total loss  as follows: 
        n_subgraphs += BATCH_SIZE
        total_loss += float(loss) * BATCH_SIZE 
 Now that the  batch loop is over, we compute the  F1  score (macro) using the prediction and  true  label lists. The macro-averaged  F1  score is a good metric in this imbalanced learning setting because it treats all classes equally regardless of the number  of samples: 
    y_pred = torch.cat(y_pred).cpu()
    y_true = torch.cat(y_true).cpu()
    f1score = f1_score(y_true, y_pred, average='macro') 
 We return the final loss, the macro-averaged  F1  score, the list of predictions, and the list of  true  labels: 
    return total_loss/n_subgraphs, f1score, y_pred, y_true 
 We create the training loop to train the model for  101  epochs: 
model.train()
for epoch in range(101):
    n_subgraphs = 0
    total_loss = 0 
 We train the heterogenous GNN on each batch using the  cross-entropy loss: 
    for batch in train_loader:
        optimizer.zero_grad()
        batch.to(device)
        out = model(batch.x_dict, batch.edge_index_dict)
        loss = F.cross_entropy(out, batch['flow'].y.float())
        loss.backward()
        optimizer.step()
        n_subgraphs += BATCH_SIZE
        total_loss += float(loss) * BATCH_SIZE 
 Every 10 epochs, we  evaluate the model on the validation set and display relevant metrics (the training loss, validation loss, and validation macro-averaged  F1  score): 
    if epoch % 10 == 0:
        val_loss, f1score, _, _ = test(val_loader)
        print(f'Epoch {epoch} | Loss: {total_loss/n_subgraphs:.4f} | Val loss: {val_loss:.4f} | Val F1 score: {f1score:.4f}') 
 
 We obtain the following output  during training: 
 
 Epoch 0 | Loss: 0.1006 | Val loss: 0.0072 | Val F1 score: 0.6044 
 Epoch 10 | Loss: 0.0020 | Val loss: 0.0021 | Val F1-score: 0.8899 
 Epoch 20 | Loss: 0.0015 | Val loss: 0.0015 | Val F1-score: 0.9211 
 ... 
 Epoch 90 | Loss: 0.0004 | Val loss: 0.0008 | Val F1-score: 0.9753 
 Epoch 100 | Loss: 0.0004 | Val loss: 0.0009 | Val F1-score: 0.9785 
 
 Finally, we  evaluate the model on the test set. We also print  scikit-learn ’s classification report, which includes the macro-averaged  F1 score: 
_, _, y_pred, y_true = test(test_loader)
print(classification_report(y_true, y_pred, target_names=labels, digits=4))
               precision    recall  f1-score   support 
       benign     0.9999    0.9999    0.9999    700791 
   bruteForce     0.9811    0.9630    0.9720       162 
          dos     1.0000    1.0000    1.0000    125164 
     pingScan     0.9413    0.9554    0.9483       336 
     portScan     0.9947    0.9955    0.9951     18347 
     accuracy                         0.9998    844800 
    macro avg     0.9834    0.9827    0.9831    844800 
 weighted avg     0.9998    0.9998    0.9998    844800 
 
 We obtained a macro-averaged  F1  score of  0.9831 . This excellent result shows that our model has learned to predict each  class reliably. 
 The approach we adopted would be even more relevant if we could access more host-related features, but it shows how you can expand it to fit your needs. The other main advantage of GNNs is their ability to process large amounts of data. This approach makes even more sense when dealing with millions of flows. To finish this project, let’s plot the model’s errors to see how we could  improve it. 
 We create  a dataframe to store the predictions ( y_pred ) and the true labels ( y_true ). We use this new dataframe to plot the proportion of  misclassified samples: 
 
df_pred = pd.DataFrame([y_pred.numpy(), y_true.numpy()]).T
df_pred.columns = ['pred', 'true']
plt.pie(df_pred['true'][df_pred['pred'] != df_pred['true']].value_counts(), labels=labels, autopct='%.0f%%') 
 This gives us the  following chart: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 16.6 – Proportion of each misclassified class 
 If we compare this pie chart to the original proportions in the dataset, we see that the model performs better for the majority classes. This is not surprising since minority classes are harder to learn (fewer samples), and not detecting them is less penalizing (with 700,000 benign flows versus 336 ping scans). Port and ping scan detection could be improved with techniques such as oversampling and introducing class weights  during training. 
 We can gather even  more information by looking at the confusion matrix (the code can be found  on GitHub). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 16.7 – Confusion matrix for multi-class flow classification 
 This confusion matrix displays interesting results, such as a bias toward the benign class or errors between ping and port scans. These errors can be attributed to the similarity between these attacks. Engineering additional features could help the model distinguish  these classes. 
 Summary 
 In this chapter, we explored the use of GNNs for detecting anomalies in a new dataset, the  CIDDS-001  dataset. First, we preprocessed the dataset and converted it into a graph representation, allowing us to capture the complex relationships between the different components of the network. We then implemented a heterogeneous GNN with  GraphSAGE  operators. It captured the heterogeneity of the graph and allowed us to classify the flows as benign  or malicious. 
 The application of GNNs in network security has shown promising results and opened up new avenues for research. As technology continues to advance and the amount of network data increases, GNNs will become an increasingly important tool for detecting and preventing  security breaches. 
 In  Chapter 17 ,  Recommending Books Using LightGCN , we will explore the most popular application of GNNs with recommender systems. We will implement a lightweight GNN on a large dataset and produce book recommendations for  given users. 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] M. Ring, S. Wunderlich, D. Grüdl, D. Landes, and A. Hotho,  Flow-based benchmark data sets for intrusion detection , in  Proceedings of the 16th European Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security  (ECCWS), ACPI, 2017,  pp. 361–369. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 17 
 Building a Recommender System Using LightGCN 
 Recommender systems have become an integral part of modern online platforms, with the goal of providing personalized recommendations to users based on their interests and past interactions. These systems can be found in a variety of applications, including suggesting products to purchase on e-commerce websites, recommending content to watch on streaming services, and suggesting connections to make on social  media platforms. 
 Recommendation systems are one of the main applications of GNNs. Indeed, they can effectively incorporate the complex relationships between users, items, and their interactions into a unified model. In addition, the graph structure allows for the incorporation of side information, such as user and item metadata, into the  recommendation process. 
 In this chapter, we will introduce a new GNN architecture  called  LightGCN , specifically designed for recommender systems. We will also introduce a new dataset, the  Book-Crossing  dataset, which contains users, books, and over a million ratings. Using this dataset, we will build a book recommender system with collaborative filtering and apply it to get recommendations for a specific user. Through this process, we will demonstrate how to use the LightGCN architecture to build a practical  recommendation system. 
 By the end of this chapter, you will be able to create your own recommender system using LightGCN. You will learn how to process any dataset with users, items, and scores for a collaborative filtering approach. Finally, you will learn how to implement and evaluate this architecture and get recommendations for  individual users. 
 In this chapter, we will cover the following  main topics: 
 
 Exploring the  Book-Crossing dataset 
 Preprocessing the  Book-Crossing dataset 
 Implementing the  LightGCN architecture 
 
 Technical requirements 
 All the code examples from this chapter can be found on GitHub at  https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Hands-On-Graph-Neural-Networks-Using-Python/tree/main/Chapter17 . The installation steps required to run the code on your local machine can be found in the  Preface  of  this book. 
 This chapter requires a large amount of GPU. You can lower it by decreasing the size of the training set in  the code. 
 Exploring the Book-Crossing dataset 
 In this section, we  will perform exploratory data analysis on a new dataset and visualize its  main characteristics. 
 The  Book-Crossing  dataset [1] is a collection of book ratings provided by 278,858 users in  the  BookCrossing community  ( www.bookcrossing.com ). The ratings, which are both explicit (rating between 1 and 10) and implicit (users interacted with the book), total 1,149,780 and pertain to 271,379 books. The dataset was collected by Cai-Nicolas Ziegler during a four-week crawl in August and September 2004. We will use the  Book-Crossing  dataset to build a book recommender system in  this chapter. 
 Let’s download the dataset and unzip it with the  following commands: 
 
from io import BytesIO
from urllib.request import urlopen
from zipfile import ZipFile
url = 'http://www2.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/~cziegler/BX/BX-CSV-Dump.zip'
with urlopen(url) as zurl:
    with ZipFile(BytesIO(zurl.read())) as zfile:
        zfile.extractall('.') 
 This will unzip  three files: 
 
 The  BX-Users.csv  file  contains data on individual BookCrossing users. User IDs have been anonymized and are represented as integers. Demographic information, such as location and age, is also included for some users. If this information is not available, the corresponding fields contain  NULL  values. 
 The  BX-Books.csv  file  contains data on the books included in the dataset, identified by their ISBN. Invalid ISBNs have been removed from the dataset. In addition to content-based information, such as the book title, author, year of publication, and publisher. This file also includes URLs linking to cover images of the books of three  different sizes. 
 The  BX-Book-Ratings.csv  file includes  information on the ratings given to books  in the dataset. Ratings are either explicit, given on a scale from 1-10 with higher values indicating a greater appreciation, or implicit, indicated by a rating  of 0. 
 
 The following figure is a graph representation made with Gephi using a subsample of  this dataset. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 17.1 – Graph representation of the Book-Crossing dataset, with books represented as blue nodes and users represented as red nodes 
 The size of the  nodes is proportional to the number of connections (degree) in the graph. We can see popular books such as  The Da Vinci Code  that act like hubs thanks to their high number  of connections. 
 Now, let’s explore the dataset to get  more insight: 
 
 We import  pandas  and load every file with the  ;  separator and the  latin-1  encoding for compatibility issues.  BX-Books.csv  also requires the  error_bad_lines  parameter: 
import pandas as pd
ratings = pd.read_csv('BX-Book-Ratings.csv', sep=';', encoding='latin-1')
users = pd.read_csv('BX-Users.csv', sep=';', encoding='latin-1')
books = pd.read_csv('BX-Books.csv', sep=';', encoding='latin-1', error_bad_lines=False) 
 Let’s  print these DataFrames to see the columns and the number  of rows: 
ratings
           User-ID    ISBN            Book-Rating
0          276725     034545104X      0
1          276726     0155061224      5
...        ...        ...             ...
1149777    276709     0515107662      10
1149778    276721     0590442449      10
1149779    276723     05162443314     8
1149780 rows × 3 columns 
 Let’s repeat the process with the  users  DataFrame: 
users
 User-ID         Location                         Age 
 0       1       nyc, new york, usa               NaN 
 1       2       stockton, california, usa        18.0 
 2       3       moscow, yukon territory, russia  NaN 
 ...     ...     ...                              ... 
 278855  278856  brampton, ontario, canada        NaN 
 278856  278857  knoxville, tennessee, usa  NaN 
 278857  278858  dublin, n/a, ireland  NaN 
 278858 rows × 3 columns 
 Finally, the  books  DataFrame has too many columns to be printed like the two others. Let’s print the column  names instead: 
list(books.columns)
 ['ISBN', 'Book-Title', 'Book-Author', 'Year-Of-Publication', 'Publisher', 'Image-URL-S', 'Image-URL-M', 'Image-URL-L'] 
 
 The  ratings  DataFrame links the  users  and  books  DataFrames using  User-ID  and  ISBN  information and includes a rating, which could be considered a weight. The  users  DataFrame includes demographic information, such as  location and age, for each user when available. The  books  DataFrame includes content-related information about the books, such as the title, author, year of publication, publisher, and URLs linking to cover images of three  different sizes. 
 
 Let’s visualize the rating distribution to see whether we can use this information. We can plot it using  matplotlib  and  seaborn   as follows: 
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns
sns.countplot(x=ratings['Book-Rating']) 
 This gives us the  following plot: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 17.2 – Rating distribution (interaction with a book is represented as a rating of zero, while ratings between 1 and 10 are real ratings) 
 
 Do these  ratings correspond to the data we have in the  books  and  users  DataFrames? We can compare the number of unique  User-ID  and  ISBN  entries in  ratings  to the number of rows in these DataFrames as a  quick check: 
print(len(ratings['User-ID'].unique()))
print(len(ratings['ISBN'].unique()))
 105283 
 340556 
 
 Interestingly, there are fewer unique users in  ratings  compared to  users  (105,283 versus 278,858) but more unique ISBNs compared to  books  (340,556 versus 271,379). This means that our database is missing a lot of values, so we will need to be careful when  joining tables. 
 
 Let’s finish  by plotting the number of books that have been rated only once, twice, and so on. First, we calculate the number of times each ISBN appears in the  ratings  DataFrame using the  groupby()  and  size()  functions: 
isbn_counts = ratings.groupby('ISBN').size() 
 
 This creates a new DataFrame,  isbn_counts , which contains the count of each unique ISBN in the  ratings  DataFrame. 
 
 We calculate the number of occurrences of each count value using the  value_counts()  function. This new DataFrame will contain the count of occurrences of each count value  in  isbn_counts : 
count_occurrences = isbn_counts.value_counts() 
 Finally, we can plot the distribution using  pandas ’  .plot()  method. In this case, we will only plot the first  15 values: 
count_occurrences[:15].plot(kind='bar')
plt.xlabel("Number of occurrences of an ISBN number")
plt.ylabel("Count") 
 We obtain the  following plot: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 17.3 – Distribution of the number of times each book (ISBN) appears in ratings (15 first values) 
 We  see that a lot of books have only been rated once or twice. It is very rare to see books with a lot of ratings, which makes things more difficult for us since we rely on  these connections. 
 
 We repeat the same process to obtain the distribution of the number of times each user ( User-ID ) appears  in  ratings : 
userid_counts = ratings.groupby('User-ID').size()
count_occurrences = userid_counts.value_counts()
count_occurrences[:15].plot(kind='bar')
plt.xlabel("Number of occurrences of a User-ID")
plt.ylabel("Count") 
 We obtain a  similar distribution: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 17.4 – Distribution of the number of times each user (User-ID) appears in ratings (15 first values) 
 This also  means that most users only rate one or two books, but a few of them rate a lot  of books. 
 There are different issues with this dataset, such as mistakes in the year of publication or the name of the publishers, and other missing or incorrect values. However, we will not directly use metadata from the  books  and  users  DataFrames in this chapter. We will rely on the connections between  User-ID  and  ISBN  values, which is why we don’t need to clean the  dataset here. 
 In the next section, we will see how to process the dataset to prepare it before feeding it to  the LightGCN. 
 Preprocessing the Book-Crossing dataset 
 We  want to process the dataset for a particular task: recommending items, and more  specifically using a  collaborative filtering  approach. Collaborative filtering is a technique used to make personalized recommendations to users. It is based on the idea that users who have similar preferences or behaviors are more likely to have similar interests. Collaborative filtering algorithms use this information to identify patterns and make recommendations to users based on the preferences of  similar users. 
 This is  different from content-based filtering, which is a recommendation approach that relies on the features of the items being recommended. It generates recommendations by identifying the characteristics of an item and matching them to the characteristics of other items that have been liked by the user in the  past.  Content-based filtering  approaches are typically based on the idea that if a user likes an item with certain characteristics, they will also like items with  similar characteristics. 
 In this chapter, we will focus on collaborative filtering. Our objective is to determine which book to recommend to a user based on the preferences of other users. This problem can be represented as a bipartite graph as in the  following figure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 17.5 – Example of a user-item bipartite graph 
 Knowing that user  1  liked items  A  and  B , and user  3  liked items  B  and  D , we should probably recommend item  B  to user  2 , who also enjoyed items  A   and  D . 
 This is the type of graph we want to build from the  Book-Crossing  dataset. More precisely, we also want to include negative samples. In this context, negative samples refer to items that have not been rated by a given user. Items that have been rated by a particular user are also referred to as positive items. We will explain why we use this negative sampling technique when we implement the  loss  function. 
 In the rest  of the chapter, the  LightGCN  code is mostly based on the official implementation and the excellent work of Hotta and Zhou [2] and Li et al. [3] on a  different dataset: 
 
 We import the  following libraries: 
import numpy as np
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
import torch
import torch.nn.functional as F
from torch import nn, optim, Tensor
from torch_geometric.utils import structured_negative_sampling
from torch_geometric.nn.conv.gcn_conv import gcn_norm
from torch_geometric.nn import LGConv 
 We re-load  the datasets: 
df = pd.read_csv('BX-Book-Ratings.csv', sep=';', encoding='latin-1')
users = pd.read_csv('BX-Users.csv', sep=';', encoding='latin-1')
books = pd.read_csv('BX-Books.csv', sep=';', encoding='latin-1', error_bad_lines=False) 
 We only keep rows where  ISBN  information can be found in the  books  DataFrame and  User-ID  information can be found in the  users  DataFrame: 
df = df.loc[df['ISBN'].isin(books['ISBN'].unique()) & df['User-ID'].isin(users['User-ID'].unique())] 
 We only keep high ratings (>= 8/10) so the connections we create correspond to books that were liked by users. Then, we filter out even more samples and keep a limited number of rows (100,000) to speed  up training: 
df = df[df['Book-Rating'] >= 8].iloc[:100000] 
 We  create mappings from  user  and  item  identifiers to  integer indices: 
user_mapping = {userid: i for i, userid in enumerate(df['User-ID'].unique())}
item_mapping = {isbn: i for i, isbn in enumerate(df['ISBN'].unique())} 
 We count the number of users, items, and total entities in  the dataset: 
num_users = len(user_mapping)
num_items = len(item_mapping)
num_total = num_users + num_items 
 We create a tensor of  user  and  item  indices based on the user ratings in the dataset. The  edge_index  tensor is created by stacking these  two tensors: 
user_ids = torch.LongTensor([user_mapping[i] for i in df['User-ID']])
item_ids = torch.LongTensor([item_mapping[i] for i in df['ISBN']])
edge_index = torch.stack((user_ids, item_ids)) 
 We split  edge_index  into training, validation, and test sets using the  train_test_split()  function  from  scikit-learn : 
train_index, test_index = train_test_split(range(len(df)), test_size=0.2, random_state=0)
val_index, test_index = train_test_split(test_index, test_size=0.5, random_state=0) 
 We generate a batch of random indices using the  np.random.choice()  function. This generates  BATCH_SIZE  random indices from a range of  0  to  edge_index.shape[1]-1 . These indices will be used to select rows from the  edge_index  tensor: 
def sample_mini_batch(edge_index):
    index = np.random.choice(range(edge_index.shape[1]), size=BATCH_SIZE) 
 We  generate negative samples using the  structured_negative_sampling()  function from PyTorch Geometric. Negative samples are items with which the corresponding user has not interacted. We use the  torch.stack()  function to add a dimension at  the beginning: 
    edge_index = structured_negative_sampling(edge_index)
    edge_index = torch.stack(edge_index, dim=0) 
 We select the user, positive item, and negative item indices for the batch using the  index  array and the  edge_index  tensor: 
    user_index = edge_index[0, index]
    pos_item_index = edge_index[1, index]
    neg_item_index = edge_index[2, index]
    return user_index, pos_item_index, neg_item_index 
 
 The  user_index  tensor contains the user indices for the batch, the  pos_item_index  tensor contains the positive item indices for the batch, and the  neg_item_index  tensor contains the negative item indices for  the batch. 
 We now have three sets and a function to return mini-batches. The next step is to understand and implement the  LightGCN architecture. 
 Implementing the LightGCN architecture 
 The  LightGCN [4] architecture aims to learn representations for nodes by smoothing features over the graph. It iteratively performs graph convolution, where neighboring nodes’ features are aggregated as the new representation of a target node. The entire architecture is summarized in  Figure 17 .6 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 17.6 – LightGCN model architecture with convolution and layer combination 
 However,  LightGCN  adopts a simple weighted sum aggregator rather than using feature transformation or nonlinear activation as seen in other models such as the GCN or GAT. The light graph convolution operation calculates the  -th user and item embedding   and    as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The  symmetric normalization term ensures that the scale of embeddings does not increase with graph convolution operations. In contrast to other models,  LightGCN  only aggregates the connected neighbors and does not  include self-connections. 
 Indeed, it achieves the same effect by using a layer combination operation. This mechanism consists of a weighted sum using user and item embeddings at each layer. It produces the final embeddings   and   with the  following equations: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here, the contribution of  -th layer is weighted by the variable  . The authors of  LightGCN  recommend setting it  to  . 
 The  prediction shown in  Figure 17 .6  corresponds to ratings or ranking scores. It is obtained using the inner product of user and item  final representations: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Let’s now implement this  architecture in  PyTorch Geometric: 
 
 We create a  LightGCN  class with four arguments:  num_users ,  num_items ,  num_layers , and  dim_h . The  num_users  and  num_items  arguments specify the number of users and items in the dataset, respectively.   num_layers  indicates the number of  LightGCN  layers that will be used, and the  dim_h  argument specifies the size of the embedding vectors (for the users  and items): 
class LightGCN(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, num_users, num_items, num_layers=4, dim_h=64):
        super().__init__() 
 We store the number of users and items and create user and item embedding layers. The shape of the  emb_users  or   is   and the shape of the  emb_items  or    is  : 
        self.num_users = num_users
        self.num_items = num_items
        self.emb_users = nn.Embedding(num_embeddings=self.num_users, embedding_dim=dim_h)
        self.emb_items = nn.Embedding(num_embeddings=self.num_items, embedding_dim=dim_h) 
 We  create a list of  num_layers  (previously called  )  LightGCN  layers using PyTorch Geometric’s  LGConv() . This will be used to perform the light graph  convolution operations: 
        self.convs = nn.ModuleList(LGConv() for _ in range(num_layers)) 
 We initialize the user and item embedding layers with normal distributions with a standard deviation of  0.01 . This helps to prevent the model from getting stuck in poor local optima when it  is trained: 
        nn.init.normal_(self.emb_users.weight, std=0.01)
        nn.init.normal_(self.emb_items.weight, std=0.01) 
 The  forward()  method takes in an edge index tensor and returns the final user and item embedding vectors,   and  . It starts by concatenating the user  and item embedding layers and storing the result in the  emb  tensor. It then creates a list,  embs , with  emb  as its  first element: 
    def forward(self, edge_index):
        emb = torch.cat([self.emb_users.weight, self.emb_items.weight])
        embs = [emb] 
 We then apply the  LightGCN  layers in a loop and store the output of each layer in the  embs  list: 
        for conv in self.convs:
            emb = conv(x=emb, edge_index=edge_index)
            embs.append(emb) 
 We perform layer combination by calculating the final embedding vectors by taking the mean of the tensors in the  embs  list along the  second dimension: 
emb_final = torch.mean(torch.stack(embs, dim=1), dim=1) 
 We split  emb_final  into user and item embedding vectors (  and  ) and return them along with    and  : 
        emb_users_final, emb_items_final = torch.split(emb_final, [self.num_users, self.num_items])
        return emb_users_final, self.emb_users.weight, emb_items_final, self.emb_items.weight 
 Finally, the  model is created by calling the  LightGCN()  class with the  appropriate arguments: 
model = LightGCN(num_users, num_items) 
 
 Before  we can train the model, we need a loss function. The  LightGCN  architecture employs  Bayesian Personalized Ranking  ( BPR ) loss, which optimizes the model’s ability to rank positive items higher than negative items for a given user. It is implemented  as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Here,   is the  th-layer embedding matrix (concatenation of the initial user and item embeddings),   weighs the regularization strength,   corresponds to the predicted rating of a positive item, and   represents the predicted rating of a  negative item. 
 We implement it in PyTorch with the  following function: 
 
 We calculate the regularization loss based on the embeddings that are stored in the  LightGCN  model: 
def bpr_loss(emb_users_final, emb_users, emb_pos_items_final, emb_pos_items, emb_neg_items_final, emb_neg_items):
    reg_loss = LAMBDA * (emb_users.norm().pow(2) +
                        emb_pos_items.norm().pow(2) +
                        emb_neg_items.norm().pow(2)) 
 We  calculate the ratings for the positive and negative items as the dot product between the user and  item embeddings: 
    pos_ratings = torch.mul(emb_users_final, emb_pos_items_final).sum(dim=-1)
    neg_ratings = torch.mul(emb_users_final, emb_neg_items_final).sum(dim=-1) 
 Unlike the log sigmoid in the previous equation, we calculate the BPR loss as the mean of the  softplus  function applied to the difference between the positive and negative scores. This variant was chosen because it gave better  experimental results: 
    bpr_loss = torch.mean(torch.nn.functional.softplus(pos_ratings - neg_ratings)) 
 We return the BPR loss and the regularization loss  as follows: 
    return -bpr_loss + reg_loss 
 
 On top of the BPR loss, we use two metrics to evaluate the performance of  our model: 
 
 Recall@k  is the  proportion of relevant recommended items in top  k  among all possible relevant items. However, this metric does not consider the order of relevant items in  top  k : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain  ( NDGC ) measures the effectiveness  of the system’s ranking of the recommendations, taking into account the relevance of the items, where relevance is usually represented by a score or a binary relevance (relevant  or not). 
 
 The  implementation is not included in this chapter for improved readability. However, it can be found in the GitHub repository along with the rest of  the code. 
 We can now create a training loop and start training the  LightGCN  model: 
 
 We define the following constants. They can be tuned as hyperparameters to improve the performance of  the model: 
K = 20
LAMBDA = 1e-6
BATCH_SIZE = 1024 
 We try to select a GPU if one is available. Otherwise, we use a CPU instead. The model and data are moved to  this device: 
device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
model = model.to(device)
edge_index = edge_index.to(device)
train_edge_index = train_edge_index.to(device)
val_edge_index = val_edge_index.to(device) 
 We create an  Adam  optimizer with a learning rate  of  0.001 : 
optimizer = optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.001) 
 Let’s start the training loop. First, we calculate  num_batch , the number of  BATCH_SIZE  batches in an epoch. Then, we create two loops: one of 31 epochs, and a second one the length  of  num_batch : 
num_batch = int(len(train_index)/BATCH_SIZE)
for epoch in range(31):
    model.train()
    for _ in range(num_batch): 
 The  model is run on the training data and returns the initial and final user and  item embeddings: 
        optimizer.zero_grad()
        emb_users_final, emb_users, emb_items_final, emb_items = model.forward(train_edge_index) 
 The training data is then sampled in mini-batches using the  sample_mini_batch()  function, which returns the indices of the sampled user, positive item, and negative  item embeddings: 
        user_indices, pos_item_indices, neg_item_indices = sample_mini_batch(train_edge_index) 
 The embeddings for the sampled users, positive items, and negative items are  then retrieved: 
    emb_users_final, emb_users = emb_users_final[user_indices], emb_users[user_indices]
    emb_pos_items_final, emb_pos_items = emb_items_final[pos_item_indices], emb_items[pos_item_indices]
    emb_neg_items_final, emb_neg_items = emb_items_final[neg_item_indices], emb_items[neg_item_indices] 
 The loss is then computed using the  bpr_loss()  function: 
    train_loss = bpr_loss(emb_users_final, emb_users, emb_pos_items_final, emb_pos_items, emb_neg_items_final, emb_neg_items) 
 The optimizer is then used to perform the backward pass and update the  model parameters: 
    train_loss.backward()
    optimizer.step() 
 The  model’s performance is evaluated every 250 epochs on the validation set using the  test()  function. The evaluation metrics  are printed: 
    if epoch % 5 == 0:
        model.eval()
        val_loss, recall, ndcg = test(model, val_edge_index, [train_edge_index])
        print(f"Epoch {epoch} | Train loss: {train_loss.item():.5f} | Val loss: {val_loss:.5f} | Val recall@{K}: {recall:.5f} | Val ndcg@{K}: {ndcg:.5f}") 
 This gives us the  following output: 
 Epoch 0 | Train loss: -0.69320 | Val loss: -0.69302 | Val recall@20: 0.00700 | Val ndcg@20: 0.00388 
 Epoch 5 | Train loss: -0.70283 | Val loss: -0.68329 | Val recall@20: 0.01159 | Val ndcg@20: 0.00631 
 Epoch 10 | Train loss: -0.73299 | Val loss: -0.64598 | Val recall@20: 0.01341 | Val ndcg@20: 0.00999 
 ... 
 Epoch 25 | Train loss: -1.53056 | Val loss: -0.19498 | Val recall@20: 0.01507 | Val ndcg@20: 0.01016 
 Epoch 30 | Train loss: -1.95703 | Val loss: 0.06340 | Val recall@20: 0.01410 | Val ndcg@20: 0.00950 
 We  evaluate the model’s performance on the test set  as follows: 
test_loss, test_recall, test_ndcg = test(model, test_edge_index.to(device), [train_edge_index, val_edge_index])
print(f"Test loss: {test_loss:.5f} | Test recall@{K}: {test_recall:.5f} | Test ndcg@{K}: {test_ndcg:.5f}")
 Test loss: 0.06827 | Test recall@20: 0.01936 | Test ndcg@20: 0.01119 
 
 We obtain a  recall@20  value of  0.01936  and an  ndcg@20  value of  0.01119 , which is close to the results obtained by the authors of  LightGCN  on  other datasets. 
 Now that the model is trained, we want to get recommendations for a given user. The recommendation function we want to create has  two components: 
 
 First, we want to retrieve a list of books the user liked. This will help us to contextualize the recommendations for our  own understanding. 
 Secondly, we want to generate a list of recommendations. These recommendations cannot be books the user has already rated (it cannot be a  positive item). 
 
 Let’s write this function step  by step: 
 
 We create a function called  recommend  that takes in two arguments:  user_id  (the identifier for a user), and  num_recs  (the number of recommendations we want  to generate): 
def recommend(user_id, num_recs): 
 We create the  user  variable by looking up the user’s identifier in the  user_mapping  dictionary, which maps user IDs to  integer indices: 
    user = user_mapping[user_id] 
 We retrieve the  dim_h  dim vector learned by the  LightGCN  model for this  particular user: 
    emb_user = model.emb_users.weight[user] 
 We  can use it to calculate the corresponding ratings. As seen previously, we use the dot product of the embeddings for all items stored in the  LightGCN ’s  emb_items  attribute and the  emb_user  variable: 
    ratings = model.emb_items.weight @ emb_user 
 We apply the  topk()  function to the  ratings  tensor, which returns the top 100 values (scores calculated by the model) and their  corresponding indices: 
    values, indices = torch.topk(ratings, k=100) 
 Let’s get a list of this user’s favorite books. We create a new list of indices by filtering the  indices  list to only include those that are present in the  user_items  dictionary for the given user. In other words, we only keep books that this user rated. This list is then sliced to keep the first  num_recs  items: 
    ids = [index.cpu().item() for index in indices if index in user_items[user]][:num_recs] 
 We convert these book IDs  into ISBNs: 
    item_isbns = [list(item_mapping.keys())[list(item_mapping.values()).index(book)] for book in ids] 
 We can now use these ISBNs to retrieve more information about the books. Here, we want to obtain the titles and the authors so that we can  print them: 
    titles = [bookid_title[id] for id in item_isbns]
    authors = [bookid_author[id] for id in item_isbns] 
 We print this information  as follows: 
    print(f'Favorite books from user n°{user_id}:')
    for i in range(len(item_isbns)):
        print(f'- {titles[i]}, by {authors[i]}') 
 We  repeat this process, but with IDs of books that were not rated by the user ( not  in user_pos_items[user] ): 
    ids = [index.cpu().item() for index in indices if index not in user_pos_items[user]][:num_recs]
    item_isbns = [list(item_mapping.keys())[list(item_mapping.values()).index(book)] for book in ids]
    titles = [bookid_title[id] for id in item_isbns]
    authors = [bookid_author[id] for id in item_isbns]
    print(f'\nRecommended books for user n°{user_id}')
    for i in range(num_recs):
        print(f'- {titles[i]}, by {authors[i]}') 
 Let’s get  5  recommendations for a user in our database. Let’s  use  277427 : 
recommend(277427, 5) 
 This is the output  we obtain: 
 Favorite books from user n°277427: 
 - The Da Vinci Code, by Dan Brown 
 - Lord of the Flies, by William Gerald Golding 
 - The Cardinal of the Kremlin (Jack Ryan Novels), by Tom Clancy 
 - Into the Wild, by Jon Krakauer 
 Recommended books for user n°277427 
 - The Lovely Bones: A Novel, by Alice Sebold 
 - The Secret Life of Bees, by Sue Monk Kidd 
 - The Red Tent (Bestselling Backlist), by Anita Diamant 
 - Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone (Harry Potter (Paperback)), by J. K. Rowling 
 - To Kill a Mockingbird, by Harper Lee 
 
 We can  now generate recommendations for any user from the original  df  DataFrame. You can test other IDs and explore how that changes  the recommendations. 
 Summary 
 This chapter presented a detailed exploration of using  LightGCN  for book recommendation tasks. We used the  Book-Crossing  dataset, preprocessed it to form a bipartite graph, and implemented a  LightGCN  model with BPR loss. We trained the model and evaluated it using the  recall@20  and  ndcg@20  metrics. We demonstrated the effectiveness of the model by generating recommendations for a  given user. 
 Overall, this chapter has provided valuable insight into the usage of  LightGCN  models in recommendation tasks. It is a state-of-the-art architecture that performs better than more complex models. You can expand this project by trying other techniques we discussed in previous chapters, such as matrix factorization  and  node2vec . 
 Further reading 
 
 [1] C.-N. Ziegler, S. M. McNee, J. A. Konstan, and G. Lausen,  Improving Recommendation Lists through Topic Diversification , in  Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on World Wide Web , 2005, pp. 22–32. doi: 10.1145/1060745.1060754.  Available:  https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1060745.1060754 
 [2] D. Li, P. Maldonado, A. Sbaih,  Recommender Systems with GNNs in PyG ,  Stanford CS224W GraphML Tutorials , 2022.  Available:  https://medium.com/stanford-cs224w/recommender-systems-with-gnns-in-pyg-d8301178e377 
 [3] X. He, K. Deng, X. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, and M. Wang,  LightGCN: Simplifying and Powering Graph Convolution Network for Recommendation . arXiv, 2020. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2002.02126.  Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.02126 
 [4] H. Hotta and A. Zhou,  LightGCN with PyTorch Geometric .  Stanford CS224W GraphML Tutorials , 2022.  Available:  https://medium.com/stanford-cs224w/lightgcn-with-pytorch-geometric-91bab836471e 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 18 
 Unlocking the Potential of Graph Neural Networks for Real-World Applications 
 Thank you for taking the time to read  Hands-On Graph Neural Networks Using Python . We hope that it has provided you with valuable insights into the world of graph neural networks and  their applications. 
 As we conclude this book, we would like to leave you with some final pieces of advice on how to effectively use GNNs. GNNs  can be incredibly performant in the right conditions, but  they suffer from the same pros and cons as other deep learning techniques. Knowing when and where to apply these models is a crucial skill to master, as over-engineered solutions can result in  poor performance. 
 First, GNNs are especially effective when a large amount of data is available for training. This is because deep learning algorithms require a lot of data to learn complex patterns and relationships effectively. With a large enough dataset, GNNs can achieve high levels of accuracy  and generalization. 
 For similar reasons, GNNs are most valuable when dealing with complex, high-dimensional data (node and edge features). They can automatically learn intricate patterns and relationships between features that would be difficult or impossible for humans to identify. Traditional machine learning algorithms, such as linear regression or decision trees, rely on handcrafted features that are often limited in their ability to capture the complexity of  real-world data. 
 Finally, when working with GNNs, it is important to ensure that the graph representation adds value to the features. This is particularly applicable when the graph is an artificially constructed representation rather than a natural one, such as social networks or protein structures. The connections between nodes should not be arbitrary but represent meaningful relationships between  the nodes. 
 You might notice that some examples in this book did not follow the previous rules. This is mostly due to the technical limitation of being able to run the code in Google Colab, and a general lack of high-quality datasets. However, this is also reflective of real-life datasets, which can be messy and difficult to obtain in large quantities. Most of this data also tends to be tabular, where excellent tree-based models such as XGBoost are difficult  to beat. 
 More generally, sound baseline solutions are crucial, as they can be challenging to outperform, even in the right conditions. A powerful strategy when working with GNNs is to implement multiple  types of GNNs and compare their performance. For example, a convolutional-based GNN such as GCN ( Chapter 6 ) might work well for certain types of graphs, while an attention-based GNN such as GAT ( Chapter 7 ) might be better suited for others. Additionally, a message-passing GNN such as MPNN ( Chapter 12 ) might excel in certain contexts. Note how each approach is more expressive than the previous one, and each has different strengths  and weaknesses. 
 If you’re working on a more specific problem, there are several GNN approaches covered in this book that may be more appropriate. For example, if you’re dealing with small graph data that lacks node and edge features, you may want to consider using Node2Vec ( Chapter 4 ). On the contrary, if you’re dealing with large graphs, GraphSAGE and LightGCN can help manage the computational time and memory storage requirements ( Chapters 8   and  17 ). 
 Additionally, GIN and global pooling layers may be suitable for graph classification tasks ( Chapter 9 ), while Variational Graph Autoencoders and SEAL can be used for link prediction ( Chapter 10 ). For generating new graphs, you can explore GraphRNN and MolGAN ( Chapter 11 ). If you’re working with heterogeneous graphs, you may want to consider one of the many flavors of heterogeneous GNNs ( Chapters 12  and  16 ). For spatio-temporal graphs, Graph WaveNet, STGraph, and other temporal GNNs can be useful ( Chapters 13  and  15 ). Finally, if you need to explain the predictions made by your GNN, you can turn to the graph explainability techniques covered in  Chapter 14 . 
 By reading this book, you will have gained a deep understanding of GNNs and how they can be applied to solve real-world problems. As you continue to work in this field, we encourage you to put this knowledge into practice, experiment with new approaches, and continue to grow your expertise. The field of machine learning is constantly evolving, and your skills will only become more valuable as time goes on. We hope that you will apply what you have learned to tackle challenges and have a positive impact on the world. Thank you again for reading this book, and we wish you all the best in your  future endeavors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 Index 
 As this ebook edition doesn't have fixed pagination, the page numbers below are hyperlinked for reference only, based on the printed edition of this book. 
 A 
 activation function   107 
 Adamic-Adar index   165 
 adjacency list   22 
 adjacency matrix   20 - 22 
 adjacent   18 
 aggregate function   148 
 aggregation   129 
 aggregator   129 
 LSTM aggregator   129 
 mean aggregator   129 
 pooling aggregator   129 
 anomaly detection   275 
 A* search   25 
 attention scores   106 
 Attention Temporal Graph Convolutional Network (A3T-GCN) 
 implementing   267 - 273 
 autoregressive models   190 ,  191 
 average precision (AP)   169 
 averaging   108 
 B 
 batch gradient descent   126 
 Bayesian Personalized Ranking (BPR)   309 
 BERT   105 
 betweenness centrality   19 ,  20 
 bidirectional BFS   24 
 binary bag of words   68 
 BookCrossing community 
 URL   296 
 Book-Crossing dataset   296 - 302 
 preprocessing   302 - 305 
 breadth-first search (BFS)   11 ,  23 ,  51 
 implementing   23 - 25 
 C 
 canonical form   146 
 Captum   241 ,  248 
 reference link   248 
 centrality   19 
 CIDDS-001 dataset   276 - 280 
 preprocessing   281 - 287 
 classification   95 
 closeness centrality   19 ,  20 
 Cluster-GCN   142 
 collaborative filtering   302 
 combine function   148 
 common neighbors   165 
 complete graph   16 
 concatenation   108 
 connected graphs   14 ,  15 
 Constrained Graph Variational Autoencoder (CGVAE)   190 
 content-based filtering   303 
 context size   32 
 continuous bag-of-words (CBOW) model   31 
 versus skip-gram   31 
 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)   85 
 Cora dataset   68 
 analyzing, with PyTorch Geometric   69 ,  70 
 cosine similarity   30 
 COVID-19 case prediction   231 ,  232 
 MPNN-LSTM architecture   232 - 238 
 cycle   19 
 D 
 decomposition methods   242 
 Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) algorithm   192 
 Deep Graph Convolutional Neural Network (DGCNN)   174 
 deep graph generative models 
 autoregressive models   190 ,  191 
 generative adversarial networks (GANs)   191 - 193 
 Graph Variational Autoencoder (GVAE) model   188 - 190 
 deep learning   7 
 DeepWalk   29 ,  37 ,  52 
 applications   45 
 goal   38 
 implementing   40 - 44 
 random walks   29 
 Word2Vec   29 
 degree   17 ,  19 
 degree centrality   19 ,  20 
 dense graph   20 
 density   20 
 depth-first search (DFS)   11 ,  25 ,  51 
 implementing   25 ,  26 
 digraph   12 
 directed acyclic graph (DAG)   16 
 directed graphs   12 ,  13 
 Double-Radius Node Labeling (DRNL) algorithm 
 working   174 
 dynamic graphs   220 
 with temporal signals   220 
 E 
 edge-conditional graph convolutions (ECC)   189 
 edge-level RNN   190 
 edge list   22 
 edges   4 ,  12 ,  17 
 embeddings   30 
 enclosing subgraph   173 
 England Covid dataset   231 
 enzymes   150 
 Erdos-Rényi model   184 - 186 
 evidence lower bound (ELBO)   169 
 EvolveGCN architecture   221 - 223 
 EvolveGCN-H   221 
 EvolveGCN-O   221 
 implementing   223 - 231 
 explainability (XAI)   241 
 explainable model   242 
 explanation techniques   242 ,  243 
 decomposition methods   242 
 gradient-based methods   242 
 perturbation-based methods   242 
 surrogate methods   242 
 explanation techniques, metrics 
 fidelity   242 
 sparsity   243 
 Exponential Linear Unit (ELU) function   114 
 expressiveness 
 defining   146 
 F 
 Facebook Page-Page dataset   70 
 importing   72 ,  73 
 versus Cora dataset   71 
 flows   284 
 G 
 Gated Graph Convolutional Network (GGCN)   190 
 Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)   190 ,  221 
 GATv2   109 
 generative adversarial networks (GANs)   191 - 193 
 Gephi 
 reference link   68 
 GINE layer   154 
 global heuristics   165 
 Katz index   165 
 random walk with restart   166 
 global pooling   149 
 max global pooling   149 
 mean global pooling   149 
 sum global pooling   150 
 GNNExplainer   243 ,  244 
 implementing   244 - 248 
 GNN explanation   242 
 goal-directed graph generation   183 
 GPT-3   105 
 gradient-based methods   242 
 gradient descent   126 
 batch gradient descent   126 
 mini-batch gradient descent   126 
 stochastic gradient descent   126 
 graph   11 ,  12 
 bipartite graph   16 
 complete graph   16 
 connected graphs   14 ,  15 
 density   20 
 directed acyclic graph (DAG)   16 
 directed graphs   12 ,  13 
 fundamental objects   17 - 19 
 generating, with GNNs   188 
 generating, with traditional techniques   184 
 need for   4 ,  5 
 properties   12 
 rooted tree   16 
 tree   16 
 types   17 
 use cases   4 
 weighted graphs   14 
 with transition probabilities   53 
 graph algorithms   23 
 breadth-first search (BFS)   23 - 25 
 depth-first search (DFS)   25 ,  26 
 Graph Attentional Operator   109 
 graph attention layer   106 
 activation function   107 
 implementing, in NumPy   109 - 113 
 improved graph attention layer   109 
 linear transformation   106 ,  107 
 multi-head attention   108 ,  109 
 softmax normalization   107 
 Graph Attention Networks (GATs)   105 
 implementing, in PyTorch Geometric   113 - 121 
 Graph Autoencoder (GAE)   168 
 decoder   168 
 encoder   168 
 graph classification   6 
 Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)   85 
 designing   86 - 90 
 versus graph linear layers   90 - 95 
 graph datasets   7 ,  8 ,  68 
 Cora dataset   68 - 70 
 Facebook Page-Page dataset   70 - 73 
 graph generation   6 
 Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN)   148 
 graph classification   149 ,  150 
 implementing   150 - 160 
 graph isomorphism problem   146 
 graph learning 
 deep learning   7 
 graph classification   6 
 graph generation   6 
 graph signal processing   6 
 link prediction   6 
 matrix factorization   7 
 need for   6 
 node classification   6 
 random walk   7 
 graph-level readout   149 
 graph-level RNN   190 
 GraphLIME   242 
 graph linear layer   78 
 graph measures 
 betweenness centrality   19 ,  20 
 closeness centrality   19 ,  20 
 degree centrality   19 ,  20 
 graph neural network layer-wise relevance propagation (GNN-LRP)   242 
 Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)   3 ,  29 
 for real-world applications   317 
 need for   8 - 10 
 simplifying   142 
 types   318 
 usage   317 
 GraphRNN   190 ,  191 
 GraphSAGE   125 ,  126 
 aggregation   129 
 implementing, with PyTorch Geometric   138 - 142 
 neighbor sampling   126 - 128 
 graph signal processing   6 
 graph theory   4 ,  11 
 Graph Variational Autoencoder (GVAE) model   188 - 190 
 H 
 halicin   9 
 heterogeneous GNN 
 implementing   287 - 292 
 heterogeneous graphs   202 - 205 
 heuristic techniques   164 
 global heuristics   165 ,  166 
 local heuristics   165 
 hierarchical self-attention network (HAN) 
 implementing   212 - 216 
 levels   212 
 hierarchical softmax (H-Softmax)   29 ,  37 
 Historical Average (HA)   270 
 homogeneous GNNs 
 transforming, to heterogeneous GNNs   205 - 212 
 homophily   51 
 hosts   284 
 hub nodes   128 
 I 
 incident   17 
 indegree   18 
 inductive learning   137 
 on protein-protein interaction network   137 - 142 
 injective function   148 
 mapping diagram   149 
 integrated gradients   242 ,  248 
 implementing   249 - 253 
 integrated gradients, axioms 
 implementation invariance   248 
 sensitivity   248 
 interpretable model   242 
 J 
 Jaccard’s coefficient   165 
 jumping knowledge   206 
 K 
 Katz index   165 
 k-GNN   149 
 Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence   169 
 k-WL test   149 
 L 
 Leaky Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function   107 
 LightGCN   295 
 implementing   306 - 315 
 linear transformation   106 ,  107 
 link prediction   6 ,  163 
 with SEAL   173 
 link prediction, with node embeddings   167 
 Graph Autoencoder (GAE)   168 
 Variational Graph Autoencoder (VGAE)   168 ,  169 
 VGAE implementation   169 - 172 
 link prediction, with traditional methods 
 heuristic techniques   164 - 166 
 matrix factorization   166 ,  167 
 local heuristics   165 
 Adamic-Adar index   165 
 common neighbors   165 
 Jaccard’s coefficient    165 
 Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)   190 ,  221 
 loop   17 
 M 
 machine learning (ML)   29 
 matrix factorization   7 ,  163 
 for link prediction   166 ,  167 
 max global pooling   149 
 Mean Absolute Error (MAE)   101 ,  270 
 Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE)   271 
 mean aggregator   129 
 mean global pooling   149 
 Mean Squared Error (MSE)   99 ,  269 
 Message Passing Neural Network (MPNN)   200 - 202 
 operations   200 
 mini-batch gradient descent   126 
 mini-batching   126 ,  127 
 molecular GAN (MolGAN)   192 
 architecture   192 
 discriminator   192 
 generator   192 
 implementing   193 - 196 
 reward network   192 
 molecules 
 generating, with MolGAN   193 - 196 
 movie RecSys 
 building   60 - 64 
 multi-head attention   108 ,  109 
 Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)   73 ,  74 ,  189 
 mutual information (MI)   244 
 N 
 natural language processing (NLP)   29 
 neighbors   18 
 neighbor sampling technique   125 - 128 
 network homophily hypothesis   38 
 Node2Vec   49 ,  50 
 biased random walks   51 - 56 
 implementing   57 - 60 
 neighborhood, defining   50 ,  51 
 node classification   6 
 node-level attention   212 
 node regression   85 
 web traffic, predicting with   95 - 102 
 nodes   4 ,  12 
 classifying, on PubMed   130 - 137 
 classifying, with Vanilla Graph Neural Networks   78 - 82 
 classifying, with Vanilla Neural Networks   73 - 77 
 Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDGC)   310 
 NumPy 
 graph attention layer, implementing in   109 - 113 
 O 
 outdegree   18 
 P 
 path   18 ,  19 
 PeMS-M dataset   258 - 262 
 processing   263 - 267 
 Performance Measurement System (PeMS)   258 
 perturbation-based methods   242 
 pooling aggregator   129 
 protein-protein interaction network 
 inductive learning   137 - 142 
 PubMed 
 nodes, classifying   130 - 137 
 PyTorch Geometric (PyG)   105 
 GAT, implementing in   113 - 121 
 LightGCN architecture, implementing   307 
 R 
 Random Walk (RW)   7 ,  270 
 implementing   38 - 40 
 importance   38 
 realistic graph generation   183 
 Recall@k   310 
 recommender systems   6 
 Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)   75 
 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)   190 ,  221 
 regression   95 
 RMSprop   127 
 ROC AUC score   74 
 rooted tree   16 
 Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)   270 
 S 
 sampling strategy   51 
 scalability   125 
 SEAL framework   173 ,  174 
 enclosing subgraph extraction   173 
 GNN training   173 
 implementing   175 - 181 
 node information matrix construction   173 
 search bias   52 
 self-attention   105 
 self-loop   17 
 semantic-level attention   212 
 shared layers   206 
 simple path   19 
 simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES) representations   194 
 skip-connections   206 
 skip-gram model   34 - 37 
 creating   32 ,  33 
 fully connected layer   35 
 projection layer   35 
 versus CBOW   31 
 small-world model   186 
 high clustering coefficients   187 
 short paths   186 
 Watts-Strogatz model   187 
 softmax normalization   107 
 sparse graph   20 
 Spatio-Temporal GNNs   219 
 static graphs 
 with temporal signals   220 
 stochastic gradient descent   126 
 structural equivalence   51 
 sum global pooling   150 
 surrogate methods   242 
 T 
 tabular datasets   7 ,  8 
 t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE)   43 
 temporal GCN (TGCN) architecture   268 
 Temporal Graph Neural Networks (T-GNNs)   219 
 traditional graph generation techniques   184 
 Erdos-Rényi model   184 - 186 
 small-world model   186 
 traffic forecasting   6 ,  257 
 transductive learning   137 
 transformer   105 
 tree   16 
 V 
 Vanilla Graph Neural Networks 
 nodes, classifying with   78 - 82 
 Vanilla Neural Networks 
 nodes, classifying with   73 - 77 
 Variational Graph Autoencoder (VGAE)   168 
 decoder   169 
 encoder   168 
 implementing   169 - 172 
 vertices   4 ,  12 
 W 
 Wasserstein GAN (WGAN)   191 
 Watts-Strogatz model   187 ,  188 
 web traffic 
 predicting, with node regression   95 - 103 
 web traffic, forecasting    220 
 EvolveGCN architecture, using   221 - 223 
 weighted graph   14 
 Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) test   146 
 working   147 
 WikiMaths dataset   223 
 WL algorithm   147 
 Word2Vec   30 
 CBOW, versus skip-gram   31 
 skip-grams, creating   32 ,  33 
 Y 
 yEd Live 
 reference link   68 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
     
 
 www.packtpub.com 
 Subscribe to our online digital library for full access to over 7,000 books and videos, as well as industry leading tools to help you plan your personal development and advance your career. For more information, please visit our website. 
 Why subscribe? 
 
 Spend less time learning and more time coding with practical eBooks and Videos from over 4,000 industry professionals 
 Improve your learning with Skill Plans built especially for you 
 Get a free eBook or video every month 
 Fully searchable for easy access to vital information 
 Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content 
 
 Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at  www.packtpub.com  and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at  customercare@packtpub.com  for more details. 
 At  www.packtpub.com , you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks. 
 Other Books You May Enjoy 
 If you enjoyed this book, you may be interested in these other books by Packt: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Network Science with Python 
 David Knickerbocker 
 ISBN: 9781801073691 
 
 Explore NLP, network science, and social network analysis  
 Apply the tech stack used for NLP, network science, and analysis  
 Extract insights from NLP and network data  
 Generate personalized NLP and network projects  
 Authenticate and scrape tweets, connections, the web, and data streams  
 Discover the use of network data in machine learning projects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3D Deep Learning with Python 
 Xudong Ma, Vishakh Hegde, Lilit Yolyan 
 ISBN: 9781803247823 
 
 Develop 3D computer vision models for interacting with the environment  
 Get to grips with 3D data handling with point clouds, meshes, ply, and obj file format  
 Work with 3D geometry, camera models, and coordination and convert between them  
 Understand concepts of rendering, shading, and more with ease 
 Implement differential rendering for many 3D deep learning models  
 Advanced state-of-the-art 3D deep learning models like Nerf, synsin, mesh RCNN 
 
 Packt is searching for authors like you 
 If you’re interested in becoming an author for Packt, please visit  authors.packtpub.com  and apply today. We have worked with thousands of developers and tech professionals, just like you, to help them share their insight with the global tech community. You can make a general application, apply for a specific hot topic that we are recruiting an author for, or submit your own idea. 
 Share your thoughts 
 Now you’ve finished Hands-On Graph Neural Networks Using Python, we’d love to hear your thoughts! If you purchased the book from Amazon, please  click here to go straight to the Amazon review page  for this book and share your feedback or leave a review on the site that you purchased it from. 
 Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make sure we’re delivering excellent quality content. 
 Download a free PDF copy of this book 
 Thanks for purchasing this book! 
 Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books everywhere? 
 Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice? 
 Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of that book at no cost. 
 Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from your favorite technical books directly into your application.  
 The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts, newsletters, and great free content in your inbox daily 
 Follow these simple steps to get the benefits: 
 
 Scan the QR code or visit the link below 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 https://packt.link/free-ebook/9781804617526 
 
 Submit your proof of purchase 
 That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email directly 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 



 
 
   
   
		 Contents 
			 
				 Hands-On Graph Neural Networks Using Python 
				 Contributors 
				 About the author 
				 About the reviewers 
				 Preface 
					 
						 Who this book is for 
						 What this book covers 
						 To get the most out of this book 
						 Download the example code files 
						 Download the color images 
						 Conventions used 
						 Get in touch 
						 Share your thoughts 
						 Download a free PDF copy of this book 
					 
				 
				 Part 1: Introduction to Graph Learning 
				 Chapter 1: Getting Started with Graph Learning 
					 
						 Why graphs? 
						 Why graph learning? 
						 Why graph neural networks? 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 2: Graph Theory for Graph Neural Networks 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Introducing graph properties 
							 
								 Directed graphs 
								 Weighted graphs 
								 Connected graphs 
								 Types of graphs 
							 
						 
						 Discovering graph concepts 
							 
								 Fundamental objects 
								 Graph measures 
								 Adjacency matrix representation 
							 
						 
						 Exploring graph algorithms 
							 
								 Breadth-first search 
								 Depth-first search 
							 
						 
						 Summary 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 3: Creating Node Representations with DeepWalk 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Introducing Word2Vec 
							 
								 CBOW versus skip-gram 
								 Creating skip-grams 
								 The skip-gram model 
							 
						 
						 DeepWalk and random walks 
						 Implementing DeepWalk 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Part 2: Fundamentals 
				 Chapter 4: Improving Embeddings with Biased Random Walks in Node2Vec 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Introducing Node2Vec 
							 
								 Defining a neighborhood 
								 Introducing biases in random walks 
							 
						 
						 Implementing Node2Vec 
						 Building a movie RecSys 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 5: Including Node Features with Vanilla Neural Networks 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Introducing graph datasets 
							 
								 The Cora dataset 
								 The Facebook Page-Page dataset 
							 
						 
						 Classifying nodes with vanilla neural networks 
						 Classifying nodes with vanilla graph neural networks 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 6: Introducing Graph Convolutional Networks 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Designing the graph convolutional layer 
						 Comparing graph convolutional and graph linear layers 
						 Predicting web traffic with node regression 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 7: Graph Attention Networks 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Introducing the graph attention layer 
							 
								 Linear transformation 
								 Activation function 
								 Softmax normalization 
								 Multi-head attention 
								 Improved graph attention layer 
							 
						 
						 Implementing the graph attention layer in NumPy 
						 Implementing a GAT in PyTorch Geometric 
						 Summary 
					 
				 
				 Part 3: Advanced Techniques 
				 Chapter 8: Scaling Up Graph Neural Networks  with GraphSAGE 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Introducing GraphSAGE 
							 
								 Neighbor sampling 
								 Aggregation 
							 
						 
						 Classifying nodes on PubMed 
						 Inductive learning on protein-protein interactions 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 9: Defining Expressiveness for Graph Classification 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Defining expressiveness 
						 Introducing the GIN 
						 Classifying graphs using GIN 
							 
								 Graph classification 
								 Implementing the GIN 
							 
						 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 10: Predicting Links with Graph Neural Networks 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Predicting links with traditional methods 
							 
								 Heuristic techniques 
								 Matrix factorization 
							 
						 
						 Predicting links with node embeddings 
							 
								 Introducing Graph Autoencoders 
								 Introducing VGAEs 
								 Implementing a VGAE 
							 
						 
						 Predicting links with SEAL 
							 
								 Introducing the SEAL framework 
								 Implementing the SEAL framework 
							 
						 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 11: Generating Graphs Using Graph Neural Networks 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Generating graphs with traditional techniques 
							 
								 The Erdős–Rényi model 
								 The small-world model 
							 
						 
						 Generating graphs with graph neural networks 
							 
								 Graph variational autoencoders 
								 Autoregressive models 
								 Generative adversarial networks 
							 
						 
						 Generating molecules with MolGAN 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 12: Learning from Heterogeneous Graphs 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 The message passing neural network framework 
						 Introducing heterogeneous graphs 
						 Transforming homogeneous GNNs to heterogeneous GNNs 
						 Implementing a hierarchical self-attention network 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 13: Temporal Graph Neural Networks 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Introducing dynamic graphs 
						 Forecasting web traffic 
							 
								 Introducing EvolveGCN 
								 Implementing EvolveGCN 
							 
						 
						 Predicting cases of COVID-19 
							 
								 Introducing MPNN-LSTM 
								 Implementing MPNN-LSTM 
							 
						 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 14: Explaining Graph Neural Networks 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Introducing explanation techniques 
						 Explaining GNNs with GNNExplainer 
							 
								 Introducing GNNExplainer 
								 Implementing GNNExplainer 
							 
						 
						 Explaining GNNs with Captum 
							 
								 Introducing Captum and integrated gradients 
								 Implementing integrated gradients 
							 
						 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Part 4: Applications 
				 Chapter 15: Forecasting Traffic Using A3T-GCN 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Exploring the PeMS-M dataset 
						 Processing the dataset 
						 Implementing the A3T-GCN architecture 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 16: Detecting Anomalies Using Heterogeneous GNNs 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Exploring the CIDDS-001 dataset 
						 Preprocessing the CIDDS-001 dataset 
						 Implementing a heterogeneous GNN 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 17: Building a Recommender System Using LightGCN 
					 
						 Technical requirements 
						 Exploring the Book-Crossing dataset 
						 Preprocessing the Book-Crossing dataset 
						 Implementing the LightGCN architecture 
						 Summary 
						 Further reading 
					 
				 
				 Chapter 18: Unlocking the Potential of Graph Neural Networks for Real-World Applications 
				 Index 
					 
						 Why subscribe? 
					 
				 
				 Other Books You May Enjoy 
					 
						 Packt is searching for authors like you 
						 Share your thoughts 
						 Download a free PDF copy of this book 
					 
				 
			 
		 
		 
		 Landmarks 
			 
				 Cover 
				 Table of Contents 
				 Index 
			 
		 
	 
 
